  
Here, we determine which articles are to be featured articles (FAs). FAs exemplify Wikipedia's very best work and satisfy the FA criteria. All editors are welcome to review nominations; please see the review FAQ.
Before nominating an article, nominators may wish to receive feedback by listing it at Peer review. Nominators must be sufficiently familiar with the subject matter and sources to deal with objections during the FAC process. Nominators who are not significant contributors to the article should consult regular editors of the article prior to a nomination. Nominators are expected to respond positively to constructive criticism and to make efforts to address objections promptly. An article should not be on Featured article candidates and Peer review or Good article nominations at the same time.
The FA director, Raul654—or one of his delegates, Ucucha, Graham Colm, and Ian Rose—determines the timing of the process for each nomination. For a nomination to be promoted to FA status, consensus must be reached that it meets the criteria. Consensus is built among reviewers and nominators; the director or his delegate determines whether there is consensus. A nomination will be removed from the list and archived if, in the judgment of the director or his delegate:
actionable objections have not been resolved;
consensus for promotion has not been reached;
insufficient information has been provided by reviewers to judge whether the criteria have been met; or
a nomination is unprepared, after at least one reviewer has suggested it be withdrawn.
It is assumed that all nominations have good qualities; this is why the main thrust of the process is to generate and resolve critical comments in relation to the criteria, and why such resolution is given considerably more weight than declarations of support.
An editor is allowed to be the sole nominator of only one article at a time; however, two nominations may be allowed if the editor is a co-nominator on at least one of them. If a nomination is archived, the nominator(s) should take adequate time to work on resolving issues before re-nominating. None of the nominators may nominate or co-nominate any article for two weeks unless given leave to do so by a delegate; if such an article is nominated without asking for leave, a delegate will decide whether to remove it. Nominators whose nominations are archived with no (or minimal) feedback will be given exemptions.
Use of graphics or templates including graphics (such as {{done}}, {{not done}} and {{xt}}) are discouraged, as they slow down the page load time and lead to errors in the FAC archives.
A bot will update the article talk page after the article is promoted or the nomination archived; the delay in bot processing can range from minutes to several days, and the {{FAC}} template should remain on the talk page until the bot updates {{ArticleHistory}}.
Table of Contents – This page: Purge cache, Checklinks, Check redirects, Dablinks
Featured content:
Featured article tools:
Nomination procedure
Before nominating an article, ensure that it meets all of the FA criteria and that peer reviews are closed and archived. The featured article toolbox (at right) can help you check some of the criteria.
Place {{subst:FAC}} on the talk page of the nominated article and save the page.
From the FAC template, click on the red "initiate the nomination" link or the blue "leave comments" link. You will see pre-loaded information; leave that text. If you are unsure how to complete a nomination, please post to the FAC talk page for assistance.
Below the preloaded title, complete the nomination page, sign with ~~~~ and save the page.
Copy this text: {{Wikipedia:Featured article candidates/name of nominated article/archiveNumber}} (substituting Number), and edit this page (i.e., the page you are reading at the moment), pasting the template at the top of the list of candidates. Replace "name of ..." with the name of your nomination. This will transclude the nomination into this page. In the event that the title of the nomination page differs from this format, use the page's title instead.
Supporting and opposing
To respond to a nomination, click the "Edit" link to the right of the article nomination (not the "Edit this page" link for the whole FAC page). All editors are welcome to review nominations; see the review FAQ for an overview of the review process.
To support a nomination, write *'''Support''', followed by your reason(s), which should be based on a full reading of the text. If you have been a significant contributor to the article before its nomination, please indicate this. A reviewer who specializes in certain areas of the FA criteria should indicate whether the support is applicable to all of the criteria.
To oppose a nomination, write *'''Object''' or *'''Oppose''', followed by your reason(s). Each objection must provide a specific rationale that can be addressed. If nothing can be done in principle to address the objection, the director may ignore it. References on style and grammar do not always agree; if a contributor cites support for a certain style in a standard reference work or other authoritative source, reviewers should consider accepting it. Reviewers who object are strongly encouraged to return after a few days to check whether their objection has been addressed. To withdraw the objection, strike it out (with &lt;s&gt; ... &lt;/s&gt;) rather than removing it. Alternatively, reviewers may transfer lengthy, resolved commentary to the FAC archive talk page, leaving a link in a note on the FAC archive.
To provide constructive input on a nomination without specifically supporting or objecting, write *'''Comment''' followed by your advice.
For ease of editing, a reviewer who enters lengthy commentary may want to create a neutral fourth-level sub-section, named either ==== Review by EditorX ==== or ==== Comments by EditorX ====. Please do not create subsections for short statements of support or opposition—for these a simple *'''Support''',*'''Oppose''', or *'''Comment''' followed by your statement of opinion, is sufficient. Please do not use emboldened sub-headings with semi-colons, as these create accessibility problems.
If a nominator feels that an Oppose has been addressed, they should say so after the reviewer's signature rather than striking out or splitting up the reviewer's text. Per talk page guidelines, nominators should not cap, alter, strike, break up, or add graphics to comments from other editors; replies are added below the signature on the reviewer's commentary. If a nominator finds that an opposing reviewer is not returning to the nomination page to revisit improvements, this should be noted on the nomination page, with a diff to the reviewer's talk page showing the request to reconsider.
 [edit] Nominations 
 Nominator(s): Sturmvogel 66 (talk) 22:12, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article because I believe that it meets the FAC criteria. It had a MilHist ACR two years ago and Dank has been kind enough to give it a through copyedit recently. While I'm in the WikiCup, this article is not eligible.--Sturmvogel 66 (talk) 22:12, 11 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Support on prose per standard disclaimer. These are my edits. - Dank (push to talk) 01:50, 12 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Nominator(s):Ceoil, Truthkeeper88, Johnbod
  Panel painting by Jan van Eyck. Thanks to Kafka Liz and Cocolacoste for their copyedits and suggestions. Ceoil (talk) 22:18, 10 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Comments
 Can you add the date of painting to the first sentence? Otherwise there's no way for the reader to get a sense of time.
Are you sure our MoS allows lead pics on the left; I think they are mandated to be on the right...
"Hubert is now credited with only a very few works"—is this relevant for the lead?
1438–1440 → 1438–40 throughout, per WP:YEAR.
"Suermondt collection": what is this? Is there a relevant article to link to? (reading a later section, maybe "collection of Barthold Suemondt" is clearer)
FLOS FLORIOCOLORUM APPELLARIS etc: convert to lower-case per MOS:ALLCAPS and the slightly complicated MOS:ETY.
I think the prose is underhypenated in several places—jewel studded, earliest known, Near contemporary, and up to date, for eg—but to an extent it may be a preference issue.
  I hope to read and review this excellent article in more detail in the near-future.—indopug (talk) 13:29, 11 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Thanks for the comments. Agree re Hubert and the dates in the lead, working. Im inclined to keep the lead image, not sure is disallowed, and in this instance justified I think because of the orientation of the elements of the painting and because the panel is a diptych wing. Checking out re the caps on the inscriptions, yes MOS:ETY is hard to parse ;) Ceoil (talk) 20:39, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
 Comment
  In the discussion of the possible diptych I am confused as to whether the existing panel was on the left or on the right hand side. If commentators disagree then this should be clearly stated in the text. The lead states: "Most art historians see the panel as the right wing of a dismantled diptych... " but the section "Copies and lost diptych" starts with "Art historians believe that there are a number of indicators that the panel was created as the left-hand wing of a dismantled diptych." but then states "Harbison believes the panel is "almost certainly only the right-hand wing of a devotional diptych"." Aa77zz (talk) 08:41, 12 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Nominator(s): Acdixon (talk · contribs) 21:40, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
  Since my last Kentucky governor FAC was met with a collective yawn, I've decided to see if I can generate more interest with a U.S. Vice President from Kentucky. This article has been through the wringer, from an RFC on its length and number of references, to a successful GAC nomination, to a partial copyedit from Collect (talk · contribs), to a full-fledged peer review. Now, I think it's ready for FAC. I will do my best to respond promptly to comments. Acdixon (talk · contribs) 21:40, 10 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Please see the FAC instructions where it says, "None of the nominators may nominate or co-nominate any article for two weeks unless given leave to do so by a delegate; if such an article is nominated without asking for leave, a delegate will decide whether to remove it. Nominators whose nominations are archived with no (or minimal) feedback will be given exemptions." Have you requested an exemption? Graham Colm (talk) 22:00, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
No, I didn't, because I misread the instructions. I thought they referred to re-nominating the article that just failed; I didn't see that they referred to any other article. I guess I've been in violation of this rule several times, and no one has ever called me on it, so mine was a sin of ignorance. I assume you would agree that the Stevenson nomination received minimal feedback and should qualify for an exemption? Acdixon (talk · contribs) 13:27, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
Yes I agree. Given the paucity of reviews of your previous nomination, I think it is acceptable to proceed with this one. Graham Colm (talk) 15:35, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): Wehwalt (talk) 20:12, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article because… I think it meets the criteria. The Flying Eagle cent was the first U.S. small cent. It did not last long, but it had an impact both in ending the common use of foreign coins in the United States and in making Americans more aware of their coins. Enjoy.Wehwalt (talk) 20:12, 10 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Nominator(s):  Mogism (talk) 18:52, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article because I think it says everything about bal maidens (female manual labourers in the mines of south-west Britain) that any general reader could reasonably want to know. A peer review didn't get any responses, but I wasn't really surprised by that as everyone I'm aware of with in interest in the topic had already looked at it by that point. As mentioned at the peer review, this relies very heavily on Lynne Mayers but that's purely because her series is so definitive, it's unlikely anyone will ever write another significant work on the topic. None of this material is disputed or controversial, so there's not an "only giving one point of view" problem. Mogism (talk) 18:52, 9 February 2013 (UTC) 
 A great piece of work in a topic that I'm interested in, so I have a few suggestions... 
 Firstly, although I don't have the 2008 edition of Mayers' book, I do have a copy of the Hypatia Trust 1st edition which is A4 sized with 246 pages. The pagination is evidently different, but does Mayers mention any significant changes in the 2nd ed.?
 The correct term for what the article calls a metal mine or metal mining throughout is metalliferous, as used by Mayers herself.
 Lead photo
 "Bal maidens in traditional protective clothing, 1890" — Are they not wearing their clean white aprons which were exchanged for rough hessian ones for work? There's a similar-looking photo on p.48 of Mayers 1st ed. showing "two Dolcoath balmaidens, wearing their best aprons [...] One has her work apron over her arm".
 Mechanisation and the 18th century copper boom
 "In 1678 Clement Clerke introduced the coal-powered reverberatory furnace, allowing metal to be separated from fine grains of ore which had previously been discarded as waste, greatly increasing the quantity of metal extractable from ore.[35]" — I think this gives the wrong impression both regarding the date and the fate of the "fines" (the older method of smelting tin was the blowing house). Mayers herself seems confused here (at least in the 1st ed.) Since this isn't central to the article, I think something simpler like "The introduction of the coal-powered reverberatory furnace greatly improved the yield" would be better.
 Working conditions
 "Other contemporary observers noted that bal maidens were generally good natured and well behaved,[118] and often devoutly religious,[117] but it is well-documented that bal maidens typically took great pride in their own appearance and clothing.[119]" — should that really be a "but" in there?
 Notes
 Note b. should mention that that first reference is to "ball maidens" [sic]. Out of interest the text (as reported the next day by another newspaper) was apparently as follows:
 
The disasters which occur from the want of a Breakwater at Padstow prove the expediency of such an erection, by means of which the brig Isabella lately wrecked near that port and her valuable cargo would in all probability have been preserved. The country-people in that neighbourhood have been for some time busily employed in securing articles which belonged to the cargo of this vessel. On Wednesday evening a box of figs was discovered on Saint Miniver Common by a party of females on the look-out for concealed plunder; who were attacked by some ball maidens returning from a mine. After a sharp contest of two hours, victory declared in favour of the ball maidens who bore away the prize.
 
 Not just "rough in speech", eh!
 Note d. "Streaming was the original means of collecting ore which had eroded from mineral deposits and settled on stream and river beds, by separating the heavy metal from the lighter surrounding mud and gravel." — metal should read ore here, but even with that change this still isn't correct, something like "Streaming involved the collection of ore-bearing pebbles from alluvial deposits in river and stream beds where they had accumulated after being eroded from the ore-bearing lodes." would be more accurate. (That's wrong too - I'll come back on this)
  Hope this helps, may have some more later.  —SMALLJIM  18:52, 10 February 2013 (UTC) 
 
From the preface to the second edition, the most significant changes from the original Hypatia work are "to extend the geographic scope to include Dartmoor and the Teign and Exe valleys; a more extensive use of the 1952 scrapbook compiled by the Troon Women's Institute; use of the "Day and Night Book" of two captains from Dolcoath in 1822-23; a much fuller treatment of 19th century tin streaming; a change to bal maiden rather than balmaiden as a more authentic usage". (Translation for readers unfamiliar with UK geography: 1st ed only covers Cornwall but 2nd ed covers the whole southwest.)
I agree, but "metal mine" is repeated so often, for obvious reasons, that I'm reluctant to use the term "metalliferous". I know it's technically the correct term, but there's no risk of "metal mine" misleading readers into thinking a mine was made of metal, as opposed to extracting metals. If people think it's a problem I can change it, obviously.
Impossible to say, as the photo isn't high enough quality to tell if the aprons are work aprons that haven't yet got dirty, or clean aprons that they're going to take off as soon as the photographer has finished. I think it would be very confusing to readers to have a long explanation in the caption, since the aprons would have looked the same in either case.
Agree and have removed. I think it's worth mentioning the introduction of the furnaces, as it explains why the industry suddenly became efficient enough for large-scale operations to start, but there's no need to go into technical details.
I think the "but" is appropriate in the context of "were they spendthrifts who blew all their spare cash on fancy clothes?". In devoutly Methodist 19th century Cornwall, "devoutly religious" and "pride in their own appearance" would have been considered incompatible.
Agreed, added.
Simplified further to "by collecting ore-bearing pebbles from river and stream beds" - again, readers don't need the technical details.
Thanks for taking the time to look at this! Mogism (talk) 22:10, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 
Thanks for all that, especially the edition differences - looks like I can refer to the first ed. text without too much trouble.
Metal mine — well, if the reliable sources use the full term... But I'm happy to see what others think.
Aprons — on p.49 of my Meyers it specifically says "The best one ... worn to and from the mine as well as for photographs and special occasions." If not in the caption, a mention of how dirty the hessian aprons got would be useful (we have a brief description from Minnie Andrews, and it's covered in Schwartz's Tin Mines and Miners of Lanner (2001) p. 87 ISBN 1-84114-019-8).
Reverb. furnace — the way it's worded leads one to assume that 1678 was the date it was introduced here, which it wasn't: my Mayers only says "at the beginning of the 18th century".
Pride in appearance — OK, I see what you're getting at, but to me the phrasing in the text doesn't express that clearly; and is that actually what the sources are implying?
Pebbles — no, sorry for the confusion caused by my strike-out. That would have been the very earliest means of collecting ore (before streaming): I'll sleep on this!
 —SMALLJIM  00:48, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
  Well, today I've done what I should have done yesterday – I printed out the article and worked through it, pencil in hand. I'm sorry to say that the whole thing ended up covered in adverse comments. Now I'm not an experienced FA reviewer (I didn't even read the instructions about not using semicolon emboldened headings!), nor am I familiar with how the FA criteria are currently being interpreted. I know I can be prone to nitpicking, too, so I think I'd better wait for some other opinions before I consider making further in-depth comment: I don't want to potentially waste your (or my!) time. Using the broad FA criteria, though, I'd say that the section structure is insufficient to support the content – the text often diverges quite widely from the stated section topic. And regarding comprehensiveness, there's no discussion of "clay maidens" or of BMs work in mining for other minerals, to which Mayers (1st ed.) devotes two chapters. I'd like to see, too, more about the disconnect between how the BMs were seen and reported on by (privileged) visitors and the apparent truth revealed by the mine inspections (Mayers' "Myth and Reality" chapter). With apologies,  —SMALLJIM  23:20, 11 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Nominator(s): — Tomíca(T2ME) 18:26, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article because... "Cry Me a River" is one of the most memorable and iconic songs recorded by Justin Timberlake. Thanks to that, I found a descent amount of information which I placed within the article page. This is the second FA nomination; regarding the first there were some prose issues that thanks to the help from my fellow editors such as Wikipedian Penguin, Dan56 and Mark Arsten I believe they are gone. I would ask the editors who oppose to provide their reason for such and add additional comments how can I improve the article. Thank you. — Tomíca(T2ME) 18:26, 9 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Note: This is a WikiCup nomination. The following nominators are WikiCup participants: Tomica. To the nominator: if you do not intend to submit this article at the WikiCup, feel free to remove this notice. UcuchaBot (talk) 00:01, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
Support I have to agree that the prose was not ready last time, but now that it has been copyedited by Mark Arsten, I have nothing to say about it but good work. I understand how much Tomica has worked on this article, and I am happy so support this time again. — ΛΧΣ21 00:10, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 
Oh, thank you Hahc! — Tomíca(T2ME) 00:11, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
With all the respect Hahc, in the last FAC you !voted support without leaving any comments whatsoever, but you have now admitted that there were prose issues with the article at the time. I assume good faith, but I hope this one is reconsidered if you want the delegates to take your vote into account Till 11:32, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
 Just a comment. I think that the caption for the sample is a bit too large.  — Statυs (talk, contribs) 02:19, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 
Done. I trimmed a bit. — Tomíca(T2ME) 10:19, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 Comment, with an oppose for now. I agree with the nom when he says that various issues with the prose have been dealt with since the last FAC. However, various parts of the article have left me baffled and confused. For example, after reading "...about a brokenhearted man who cannot accept the past", I viewed the attributed source and ended up with something completely contradictory to this statement. The source doesn't say he "cannot accept the past", it says that he "refuses to look back" despite being previously broken-hearted, which is the complete opposite of what the article says. I also didn't understand the part which said "who may represent Spears"—I haven't seen the video, so perhaps this was some sort of commentary from the director? I've only looked at the lead, but it appears that some work will need to be completed before the article is going to be considered our best work. I know I'm probably going to get a bunch of angry comments like last time for posting this, but to be honest FAC is all about determining if an article is of professional standard to be considered Wiki's best work. I would rather be overly critical of someone's work to help them with improving it rather than misleading them by omitting issues at hand. Good luck with the nomination, I will probably revisit later to go through other aspects of the article. Btw, I am prepared to strike my oppose if I decide it's not necessary anymore Till 11:32, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
 
Hi Till. Thanks for giving you opinion here. Tbh, I was little worried about "refuses to look back" stuff, so I added in its original form with a reference in the lead. Also, the portrayal of Spears [it's not what the director said but critics commented on it and also Timberlake himself] ... However, I copy-edited the sentence in the lead. I hope it's fine now. Looking forward for other comments before you change your vote [hopefully]. — Tomíca(T2ME) 11:53, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
  ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘ 
 "...was inspired by Timberlake's failed relationship with pop singer Britney Spears..." → "Failed" is a bit odd here. Perhaps there's an alternative such as 'ended' (or any others you could think of)?
 
Done, replaced it with end. — Tomíca(T2ME) 10:46, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
 "some of whom considered it a stand-out track on Justified and praised Timbaland's production". → 'Some of whom' doesn't work here, just write 'who considerd it a...'
 
 What's the point in saying 'for shipments of 35,000.....' in the lead. That should just be a summary of the article without going into specific details.
 
 "In the video, Timberlake's character spies on his ex-lover – who allegedly portrays Spears – and plots revenge with help from Timbaland and a new lover." → Like I said above this is confusing for me.
 
I would need additional help for this. — Tomíca(T2ME) 10:46, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
 The first section of the article is glued together with a bunch of quotes. Did you consider paraphrasing any of them?
 
Same as above. — Tomíca(T2ME) 10:46, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
 (Generally) a comma should come before 'respectively'
 
 "It was released on a CD single in Germany on January 23" → on a CD single? Did you mean 'as a CD single'?
 
 "The single contained the album version of the song" → It should be in present tense
 
 'Comprising' should be composing or another alternative
 
Replaced with composing, although I am not fully sure if it is the right alternative. — Tomíca(T2ME) 10:46, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
 I don't think you need to write "previously included".
Removed it. — Tomíca(T2ME) 10:46, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
Again with the present tense: "The single featured the album version of the song".
 
 "According to Annet Artani, Spears' 2003 song "Everytime", which Artani co-wrote..." → Doesn't read well. I was wondering who it was, but then the sentence tells it too late (in my opinion).
 
I am not sure how to this one either. Grammatically the sentence is correct. — Tomíca(T2ME) 10:46, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
  Till 01:00, 12 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Nominator(s): SchroCat (talk) 03:49, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
  One of the forgotten giants of the golden age of British detective fiction, H. C. McNeile is a largely forgotten figure today. Best known for his Bulldog Drummond stories, McNeile created the forerunner to later thriller heroes—Drummond was both a proto-Bond and Biggles—but he also wrote extensively about the First World War, while serving on the front line. Some top-drawer assistance during the peer review has helped immensely in developing this article. – SchroCat (talk) 03:49, 9 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Support – I took part in the peer review, where my few quibbles were satisfactorily attended to. The article is comprehensive but not excessive in length, well proportioned, unbiased, well referenced, and in highly readable prose. It meets the FA criteria, in my opinion. Tim riley (talk) 10:11, 9 February 2013 (UTC) 
 
Tim, That's very kind of you: thank you so much for your very kind time and attention during the PR and here. - SchroCat (talk) 14:14, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
  Support – I have had the joy of following this article from the start and have enjoyed its progression to FAC. Like Tim I played a hand at the peer review where all my comments were addressed. A thoroughly worthy candidate and one that certainly has my support to FA status. -- CassiantoTalk 10:35, 9 February 2013 (UTC) 
 
Many thanks Cass: your copy edits part way through the re-write were very welcome, as were your subsequent comments at PR and here. Thanks again. - SchroCat (talk) 14:14, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
  Image check - all OK (3 of 3 done). some of the images need clarification regarding their copyright status: 
 File:Sapper_APWatt.jpg has 2 problems: "for representation in Wikipedia articles" would be an invalid license limitation for Wiki-images (it must be completely free except attribution). The other issue is the missing OTRS-ticket tag, making it hard to verify the situation. Is there a similar image of him available with a clearer copyright situation? Either replace or we could try a request to check it on OTRS-noticeboard.
 
I have not found any other images on my searches, but it is possible there are others in books that could be scanned. I thought that the email agreement from the copyright owners for us to use it on Wiki would be sufficient, but I'll ask at Commons for some more clarity on the use. - SchroCat (talk) 15:31, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
 File:No_Man's_Land_-_1ed_ed_cover.jpg - OK, only when the cover was first used for the US edition. Could you clarify, if this was the first published edition and/or other editions used different covers?
 
It was first used in 1917 on the US first edition. The only edition of the book published before that was the UK edition, which had a different cover. (see the covers here. - SchroCat (talk) 15:31, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
 File:Bulldog_Drummond_Poster.jpg - The source website claims: "The artwork was done by E. William Haemmel.", author info needs to be checked and added. Also the country of origin is unclear, could you verify, that the poster was first published in the US and not in the UK? (if UK, you need a second UK-specific copyright tag).
 
As far as can be ascertained, it was the US only, (although as this is a lost film, there is very little info, including artwork). E. William Haemmel was an American illustrator and the searches I did for him previously show little info, except a few covers of US magazines. - SchroCat (talk) 15:31, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
Hm, F. or E. William Haemmel? This link [[1]] of an old newspaper , and a few others, has F. as illustrator of covers. Either way i'll add a small note with disclaimer to the summary.
 Other images are OK (PD-1923, geograph project). Sources and authors provided.
  Generally, when the work's country of origin is not US, you'll need a second copyright tag for this country (atleast for Commons images, images downloaded on Wiki-servers would be OK with US-copyright only). GermanJoe (talk) 15:10, 9 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Status update, 2 of 3 done GermanJoe (talk) 16:05, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
All images OK - first image deleted via OTRS-team and replaced with fair-use File:(Herman)_Cyril_McNeile_by_Howard_Coster.jpg. GermanJoe (talk) 22:16, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
Thanks very much GermanJoe, for all your work on this review - as well as going off and dealing with the OTRS team too: it is very mcuh appreciated! - SchroCat (talk) 22:21, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
  Source review - spotchecks not done 
 Page number for pull-quote in Post-war?
 
 FN2, 97: possible to format these as single footnotes?
 
Finally worked it out! - SchroCat (talk) 19:47, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 
It's the ODNB, available online (through the cite) and doesn't carry a page number in this format. - SchroCat (talk) 09:34, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 Check alphabetization of Journals
 
 Where is Westport? Whitefish? Jefferson?
 
 Be consistent in whether you include publishers for journals
 
 
Many thanks Nikkimaria: as always your insights are much appreciated. - SchroCat (talk) 19:47, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 Initial Comments from Ceranthor
 Source 15, 94, 60, 63, 89, and 95 should probably have publishers. Source 5 and 20 also.
 
They're not needed, as per WP:CITEHOW. I suspect that the logic is that it would be misleading, as the ownership now has nothing to do with the material printed in the 1920s—30s. - SchroCat (talk) 09:39, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 Some of the citations to Treadwell 2001, p. 111. are unnecessary, making the extent to "m" bothersome. In the bits of text where it is used successively alone after itself, such as in these two sentences ("Few details are known about McNeile's wartime service, as his records were destroyed by incendiary bombs during the Second World War.[7] He spent time with a number of Royal Engineer units on the Western Front, including 1st Field Squadron, 15th Field Company and 33rd Division, where he was the commander.[7]") I don't think it needs to be cited more than once. I think this is most prevalent in "First World War service".
 
There's only two (one of which is your quoted one) which I'm comfortable taking out. The others are not clear cut enough to remove without appearing to be supported by other references. - SchroCat (talk) 19:57, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 Consistency is needed for the footnotes listing for example "The ten Drummond novels are"... I changed them to a prose format, but it is entirely up to you whether or not they should be a list or prose. They just all need to be the same, please!
Are sources 94 and 95 ("New Mystery Stories") actually separate articles, or is the difference just a matter of date of publication?
 
Different articles. - SchroCat (talk) 09:35, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
  Will come back to look over prose once these comments are addressed. ceranthor 22:38, 9 February 2013 (UTC) 
 
Many thanks for your comments: I look forward to any further comments you have - Cheers - SchroCat (talk) 19:57, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
  Comments, leaning to support: I carried out a limited peer review (images and lead prose). Having just read the whole article, I think it is in pretty good shape, though I think one more prose pass would be beneficial. I have done a few fixes myself; in addition, here is a list of some relatively minor points I picked up in the first half of the article. I'd like to be reassured that the second half has been checked over, before fully committing to support: 
 "although he adopted the life-long nickname Mac to his friends" - does not real well. Is "Mac" really a "nickname"? For someone called McNeile I'd say it was a diminutive. And does one "adopt" one's own nickname? I think the phrase should be simplified: "...although he was always known by his friends as Mac"
"He spent time with a number of Royal Engineer units on the Western Front, including 1st Field Squadron, 15th Field Company and 33rd Division, where he was the commander". What exactly was he commander of? It reads as though you mean the 33rd Division, but divisional commanders were Major-generals, so I assume you don't mean that. As a captain he may have commanded a company. Needs clarification.
"McNeile later admitted...": this phrasing always sounds like a confession to a crime. Perhaps "confided"?
I think the capitalisation in "and was Mentioned in Despatches" is dubious. Outside Wikipedia it is not normally written like this. Note: this usage occurs twice in the paragraph.
In what sense was Treadwall an "independent" scholar?
"was briefly hospitalised, forcing him..." Better: "which forced him..."
"there is also an element of The Scarlet Pimpernel too." Last word redundant ("also" encompasses "too")
" Later in 1922 he resigned his commission..." "He" is inadequate; you've mentioned two other people since last naming NcNeile.
Link tax exile, and also reorder the sentence so that it doesn't imply that McNeile's wife was the tax exile.
  Brianboulton (talk) 20:16, 12 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Nominator(s): BollyJeff | talk 17:47, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article because Priyanka Chopra is a popular Indian actress who is now trying to break into the American/International music scene. In the last 4 months this article was promoted to GA, received a copy edit from the GOCE, and had a peer review. I think it meets the FA criteria now. BollyJeff | talk 17:47, 8 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Nominator(s): ♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 02:38, 8 February 2013 (UTC) --12george1 (talk) 02:43, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article because Hurricane Carol was a hell of a storm. There's a wicked bad stawm up in New England soon, but Carol was a bad one back in the 50's, in fact one of two storms to hit New England in a two week period in 1954. So it's an important storm, and after a lot of work (with some assistance from User:12george1, who I have invited to be a co-nominator), I believe the article is a great representation on the event, including the hurricane's track and what it did. Hope you enjoy. ♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 02:38, 8 February 2013 (UTC) 
 I accept your invitation, Hurricanehink. This will be a WikiCup nomination.--12george1 (talk) 02:43, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
 Note: This is a WikiCup nomination. The following nominators are WikiCup participants: 12george1. To the nominator: if you do not intend to submit this article at the WikiCup, feel free to remove this notice. UcuchaBot (talk) 00:01, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
 Hoping to review this, but it may be a few days. --Rschen7754 06:33, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
No prob, I'm not in any hurry. --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 06:52, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
  Comments 
 "Hurricane Carol was among the worst tropical cyclones to affect the New England region of the United States." -- Ever or on record?
Added "on record", although to be fair, it's unlikely there was a storm that caused $400 million in damage in NY before Carol :P --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 00:36, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
"On August 27, Carol intensified to reach winds of 105 mph (169 km/h), but weakened as its motion turned to a northwest drift." -- 169 km/h needs to be rounded. In the second sentence you say it was moving northwest, but in this one you say it turned to the northwest. Confusing.
Fixed both. I changed it to "became a northwest drift". --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 00:36, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
"A strong trough of low pressure turned the hurricane northeastward, and Carol intensified into a major hurricane." -- The wording of this sentence suggests that the trough prompted the system to intensify into a major hurricane, which I do not believe is the case here.
"While paralleling the Mid-Atlantic and Southeastern United States, the storm produced strong winds and rough seas caused minor coastal flooding and slight damage to houses in North Carolina, Virginia, Washington, D.C., Delaware, and New Jersey." -- Caused to causing
Ack, I blame 12G, he did it. :P --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 00:36, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
"Storm surged flooded LaGuardia Airport and inundated Montauk Highway, which left the eastern portion of Long Island isolated." -- Surge, not surged.
"Following the storm, Carol was retired, becoming the first name to be stricken from the naming lists in the Atlantic basin." -- I personally don't like the usage of "stricken". How about removed or something more generic?
"It moved to the northwest, and intensified into a tropical storm just six hours after forming" -- No need for a comma.
"With a large anticyclone persisting across the southeastern United States,[3] the motion of Carol turned to a northwest drift." -- Same as my second comment. You can't start northwest and then turn northwest."
Tweaked. It started as NNW and later became NW. --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 00:36, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
"Early on August 31, Carol passed very near Cape Hatteras, North Carolina with Reconnaissance Aircraft intensity estimates between 75 mph (120 km/h) to 125 mph (200 km/h)." -- Comma after Carolina, and I believe it should be "between 75 mph (120 km/h) AND 125 mph (200 km/h)."
Changed wording, and combined the like units. --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 00:36, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
"The hurricane continued north-northeastward with a forward motion of up to 39 mph (63 km/h),[2] and Carol intensified further to make landfall on eastern Long Island as an upper Category 2 or a Category 3 hurricane" -- Surely the database lists one or the other. Did it make landfall as a 2 or 3?
Actually, database lists both. Best track says C2, but HURDAT US hurricane list says C3. --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 00:36, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
"After quickly crossing the Long Island Sound the hurricane made its final landfall on Old Saybrook, Connecticut." -- Comma after Sound?
First you say no comma further up, now comma. I'm gonna go into a comma if this keeps up! &lt;/lame&gt; --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 00:36, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
"Carol was a small hurricane, with the strongest winds near and to the east of the center. The eye remained well-defined as it made landfall, unusual for New England hurricane landfalls; residents in Groton, Connecticut reported clear skies and calm conditions as the hurricane made landfall, which was followed by an increase to hurricane-force winds 30 minutes later." -- What's the purpose of these two sentences?
Talking about the eye, size, and structure, which wasn't detailed much elsewhere in the MH. --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 00:36, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
"The powerful extratropical storm continued northward, and after entering Canada it lost its identity over southern Quebec." --&gt; "The powerful extratropical storm continued northward, and after entering Canada, lost its intensity over southern Quebec."
  Maybe more to come later, this is the lede and Meteorological history. All in all, though, not too bad. TropicalAnalystwx13 (talk) 19:52, 9 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Thanks for the review. I replied to each. --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 00:36, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 Support. - All in all a fine contribution. Some minor prose issues remain, but certainly nothing substantial enough so as to delay promotion to FA. Well done, nice work! GabeMc (talk|contribs) 00:21, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
Support -- As noted by GabeMc, minor prose issues remain, but nothing stands out to delay my support. TropicalAnalystwx13 (talk) 21:37, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
Support Okay, I spent the last two days reading and, as usual, the writing and sourcing is good. I am more than happy to support. — ΛΧΣ21 17:26, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): TBrandley (what's up) 15:37, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article because I believe it meets the criteria following my first nomination. TBrandley (what's up) 15:37, 6 February 2013 (UTC) 
 The issues with the map still remain - it doesn't show what communities it serves, nor what other airports are nearby. Both of these are mentioned in the text, but maps are a case where a picture really is worth a thousand words. Adam Cuerden (talk) 17:56, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
I would like to create a map, but I am currently not aware of how to. I will try to get some ideas together. TBrandley (what's up) 00:15, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
Well, I don't think the FA nominator has to do everything, but I think it'd help the article a lot if somebody did it. Do we still have an active graphics lab? We used to 5 years ago, but... Adam Cuerden (talk) 00:17, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
Creating a basic map of a modern locality is pretty easy: go to Open Street map (link), size the map to whatever works best, take a screenshot, paste it into your preferred image editor (MS Paint works fine), crop it and mark it up as you see fit, save it as a JPEG file or similar and then upload the results to Wikicommons under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 license (CC-BY-SA). I've just had a go at creating an example File:Penticton Regional Airport location - initial version.jpg (which I think also partially answers the question of why Kelowna International Airport is more popular, given that it's next to the main town). You may want to use this map, but I imagine that you could make a much better one given that you have knowledge of the local area while I have none whatsoever. Nick-D (talk) 10:42, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
  Oppose Sorry, but this article still falls short of FA standards on the grounds of completeness and prose. 
 In regards to completeness, the article's content isn't up to date. It still includes mentions of 'as of 2012', and the air movements data isn't the most recent which is available from Statistics Canada's website (I found the 2011 air movements figures in 5 minutes [2], and there seems to be tons more statistical data on the airport in this report and probably elsewhere on the Stats Canada website which could be included - it would be really easy to develop a graph of the historical trend in air movements, for instance, and it would be interesting to know why over 600 military flights a year pass through this airport each year, making it one of the most Canadian military's most frequently used civil airfields by my reading of the report). In light of this and the issues which came up in the previous FAC, I'm afraid that I'm not convinced that this article is comprehensive.
In regards to prose, the article still doesn't read well. For instance, the paragraph on the Indian band's protests starts with 'Controversy has occurred over airport ownership before.', another paragraph starts with 'The Penticton Flying Club operates at the airport, which is a club where children receive a flight in an airplane with the pilot, and learn about the airplanes themselves', some wording is unclear (eg "Two of the aircraft's eighteen occupants, both crew members, were injured."), and some sections confuse the airport with the airlines who operate out of it (eg, "there has also been consideration for the airport to provide direct flights to the Montréal–Pierre Elliott Trudeau International Airport provided by Air Canada." - the airlines provide flights, not the airport which serves as their start/end point). Nick-D (talk) 10:36, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
  I would like to thank everyone for their comments, they will help improve the article significantly. But for now, as per the above, I now understand a featured article nomination at this time is not appropriate due to concerns over prose and comprehensiveness. I plan on performing basic copyedits and digging deeper for information within a couple of weeks using advanced search engines such as Google News Archive, which I didn't think of when I initially started working on the page. Then, after that and perhaps a peer review, I will nominate the article again. Again, thanks for the comments, but I withdraw this nomination for now. TBrandley (what's up) 21:26, 11 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Nominator(s): Montanabw(talk) 00:41, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article because it is a stable good article which has subsequently gone through additional upgrading with both formal and informal peer review. I believe it meets or exceeds the FA criteria. W.R. Brown was a very interesting individual who contributed significantly to the diverse fields of forestry and horse breeding. I have been the lead editor, though with substantial assistance from others, notably User:Churn and change, who helped me with a lot of cleanup and source locating, but has been inactive in recent months. It was passed for GA by none other than Malleus Fatuorum, who also did some copyediting. Thanks also to several other users for extra eyes, copyedits and helpful commentary. I have previously been part of a team on a number of FA article runs, notably for Appaloosa and Yogo sapphire, but this the first time I have taken the lead on a FAC, so please be patient if I have some awkwardness with the procedure. Montanabw(talk) 00:41, 5 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Comments on this version of the article.
What makes ref 47 reliable?
I fixed the URL (not sure how all the stuff got stripped), but the actual ref is to the 1918 stud book, which is in hard copy and difficult to access. The URL is to a faithful reproduction from the original. Is this fix better now? --Montanabw
I don't know how reliable the inflationary number are after two economics editors on one of my FACs debated it; I ended up removing the numbers. It may be worthwhile to ping Protonk (talk · contribs) or Fifelfoo (talk · contribs) to see if they are appropriate for this article.
I'll see if I can do a more elegant fix. Basically, at a peer review, someone wanted a dollars/pounds conversion, but I realized that the conversion rate at the time would not have been the same as now, so I'm open to ways to do this better! --Montanabw
Follow up: I have a version using measuring worth sitting in my sandbox if we need to swap out somthing, it's about 6K different, but it's as of 2010. In my case, I used the WP templates throughout, (Template:Inflation and layered it into Template:International dollars which claim to do all the calculations, which looks like you didn't have to option to do that in 2010, when your article was up. I hope that using the templates makes the calculations work, one of the template cites measuring worth. I could toss the USD calculations if that's the problematic bit. --Montanabw
If I may butt in, my own view is that the {{inflation}} template is almost always best avoided unless we're talking about fairly recent conversions obviously related to the typical basket of goods, which 20 or so horses clearly isn't. So I've changed the conversion to a historic opportunity cost basis using the GDP deflator, which I think is more realistic. All cited and explained in a note. In general I think that when we provide conversions we should explain the basis for the calculation, another reason to avoid the {{inflation}} template. George Ponderevo (talk) 16:03, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
I'm good with that, upon reflection, it sounds like we don't have a good way to actually translate the amount to modern US dollars (or international dollars) either, so I just tossed that bit, though if someone thinks that calculator provides good info, I can restore. The original change came because someone wanted a USD comparison, which appears to be more difficult than I thought. Montanabw(talk) 23:45, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
I don't think it's so difficult; the tricky part is in deciding on what basis to do the inflation calculation. Why not do a conversion from sterling to US dollars for the 2011 equivalent amount of £138,000, which would make it $217,000? That would be about $10,000 a horse, but I've got no idea whether or not that's cheap, which is obviously the point you're trying to make. George Ponderevo (talk) 01:15, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
Hmm. That's the problem with averages: 10K today for a fine breeding stallion is cheap, but for a good saddle horse or a broodmare is on the high end, other than for top of the line. But Brown WAS after the top of the line. He got one outstanding stallion and a bunch of mares in the deal with Blunt. I ran across a thing (blog, not RS, but I suspect is accurate) that said the price he paid for one of the Egyptian mares was equal to what he paid for the whole lot he got from Blunt,so that helps me some. According to this site, at the end of WWI, an "officer's horse" (i.e. a nice trained saddle horse, probably a gelding) was going for about 75 pounds. 2727 pounds for 20 horses breaks out to about 136 pounds per horse, which is already more than the officer's charger. But I don't know how it ranked in the UK to, say, a champion racehorse or something, which might be the best comparison. In the states, Man O'War, a stud colt intended as a racehorse, sold as a yearling for $5000 in 1918 dollars, which was also considered a bargain, considering that he became one of the best racehorses of all time. So, do you think we have it accurate, given context? (I might ping Tigerboy on racehorse prices) Montanabw(talk) 17:33, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
Perhaps it would be best just to state the figures without comment, unless you can find a reliable source for that observation about the Egyptian mare, which would really put the price Brown paid for 20 horses into context. George Ponderevo (talk) 21:02, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
Right now, the text reads " he paid only £2727 for the entire lot." I think it can stand as is, with the "only" being verified in the article citation, and I can find several more sources to verify "only" as a low price in the eyes of Arabian breeder history scholars. I pinged Tigerboy1966 and he pointed me at some racehorse articles where horses, even then,s sold for over a thousand pounds (or guineas, why did they still use guineas in 1918??) each, so by that standard, these horses did sell cheap. I have the basic inflation conversion down in the footnote and as long as you are quite sure we should use opportunity cost and not retail price index (I crunched that in the sandbox and got "This amount would be £104,000 as of 2010, using the retail price index") I'm happy. Montanabw(talk) 22:43, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
We still use guineas today at horse sales, God knows why. I'm confident about using the historic opportunity cost in preference to CPI/RPI. George Ponderevo (talk) 23:04, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
Regarding the The North Adams, Massachusetts, Transcript and Portsmouth Herald, I don't think publishing locations are needed unless it needs to be dabbed (e.g., why the Times is cited as Times (London)). Ed [talk] [majestic titan] 00:53, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
Are you suggesting that I just remove the redundant "location" parameter or adjust paper titles? The papers themselves are named with their geographic name (The Portsmouth Herald, North Adams Transcript). Does that make a difference? This shouldn't be a difficult fix, just let me know how I should do this --Montanabw
I've removed the two redundant "|location=" parameters. George Ponderevo (talk) 16:06, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
Groovy Montanabw(talk) 00:06, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
  Image check - all OK (PD-US-not renewed, PD-1923). Sources and authors provided (tweaked 1 tag to be more specific). GermanJoe (talk) 08:39, 5 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Quick comments - date formatting inconsistent (several different formats in footnotes), spacing on Forbis publisher, remount service linked twice in same sentence, not sure why there's a page number in Bibliography. Nikkimaria (talk) 14:08, 8 February 2013 (UTC) 
 All fixed I think. George Ponderevo (talk) 15:23, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
Agreed. We're just doing some minor fiddling around the edges while we await further review!  ;-) Montanabw(talk) 22:54, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
  Comments – 
 Don't think "Workers' Compensation" should be capitalized in the lead.
Neither do I, capitals removed. George Ponderevo (talk) 14:59, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
A similar issue exists in the body.
Fixed. George Ponderevo (talk) 14:59, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
International purchases: "The" after "owing to the turmoil within the Blunt family" should also be decapitalized.
Punctuation fixed plus slight rewrite. George Ponderevo (talk) 14:59, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
Reference 49 needs a publisher. Also, what makes this a reliable source?
 
Arlene Magid is a highly respected Arabian horse scholar and researcher. She seems to be putting most of her stuff on her own web site these days, but this gives you some idea of how well-known she is. I can probably dig up the info somewhere else, but this was a straightforward, understandable explanation. Let me know what you'd like to see to further demonstrate her reliability as a source. --Montanabw
 Ref 54 could use page numbers for the relevant content.
 
You're right! I forgot to do that, have to get the book- which is not at the same place where I edit wiki, but can do this in the next day or so, (tie string on finger). --Montanabw FOLLOW UP -- Added pages to the citation. --Montanabw
 If ref 30 is worthy of a PDF designation, then several of the other sources used are as well. Giants2008 (Talk) 01:39, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
 
OK, I think I fixed that, let me know if I didn't do it right. (I'm not great at the formatting stuff) --Montanabw
 Comment The lead is far too long. Three paragraphs will suffice. Regards.--Tomcat (7) 12:53, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
Four paragraphs is perfectly acceptable under the FA criteria. George Ponderevo (talk) 14:59, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
Agreed, the first two paragraphs were merged together at one point, then someone wanted them split apart again, the lead had a lot of work prior to its GA run. If you look at it, we really have a brief summary of each major point, though if you think something in there isn't needed, I am open to suggestions of what could be cut. I'll also take a peek and see if I spot anything that is really too minor for the lead and see what my "eyes have looked at this article too long" brain can cut. Montanabw(talk) 20:52, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): Chiswick Chap (talk) 09:57, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article because I believe the article now represents a helpful overview of a large topic of wide interest. The 'Camouflage' navbox shows that this article sits in a tree of articles, of which Military camouflage and Operation Bertram are also good articles, and others such as Countershading and Ship camouflage are now covered in detail. The function of the 'Camouflage' article itself is thus to provide a concise summary and overview of the whole topic. For this reason it covers a wide range of mechanisms, many with subsidiary articles, and both animal and military camouflage. Where mechanisms may be hard to grasp, they are explained graphically in specially drawn diagrams, such as for 'Eliminating shadow', 'Motion camouflage', and 'Counterillumination'. Since the article is referenced for general interest, it summarizes the historical development of camouflage. It does this both by calling out articles on pioneering books such as those of Abbott Thayer and Hugh Cott, and by summarizing the history of military camouflage. Finally, it provides a wide but carefully chosen set of images, nearly all from Commons, illustrating each aspect of this especially visual topic. It has been found necessary to group the images in galleries to keep them conveniently close to the sections that they illustrate. The bibliography is grouped for easy access by readers with different interests. Chiswick Chap (talk) 09:57, 4 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Comments by Grandiose 
 I don't understand the need for the rather unusual approach taken to images in the article, particularly in the "History" section (since I can't see a reason to depart from regular principles there). Why so many images? We don't have to have pictures of all these people, and it breaks up the flow in my opinion.
  --- all people images removed; other images have been culled. 
 : Thank you, this does need explaining. The topic is about hiding from view, often in plain sight, so it is necessarily and essentially visual. Accordingly each aspect and mechanism of camouflage is illustrated to show what is done and why. I don't have any special attachment to galleries, so if anyone knows a better way to present the images I'm happy to go with it. 
 In the History section, your point has more force, I agree. I felt it would be helpful to readers actually to see who did what, to put a face and name to each topic, such as Thayer and countershading. We could remove the people, but that would take away from the history the people who made it happen. Of course that could become a subsidiary article, 'History of camouflage' if you prefer. I've removed the portraits from History.Chiswick Chap (talk) 21:10, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
 This image has a non-free usage rationale. Mare was French. If the image, or rather the notebook of which it forms part, counts as having been published then its pre-1923 date means it is public domain and it can be moved to Commons. Since it was unclear to me I treated it as non-free. Chiswick Chap (talk) 11:00, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
I think you have made a mistake in your understanding somewhere. The file does not have a fair use rationale. It merely is somewhat unclear. It can stay on en.wiki if it is correctly licensed for the US, which it is. It should not be moved to Commons without a French rationale and, for FA purposes, this should be clearly indicated so the reader of the file description is not in doubt. Grandiose (me, talk, contribs) 14:25, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
Oh I'm sorry, the description has been updated recently, by bot and human, so my NFUR is now only in the history. I have put a comment on the image description page as requested. Chiswick Chap (talk) 14:36, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
  Quick question how many non-free images are used in the article?—indopug (talk) 13:04, 4 February 2013 (UTC) 
 9 right now. If we remove 3 portraits, 6. 2 could go to Commons (Yehudi lights by US military; Dazzle Ball, 1919), leaving 4. Chiswick Chap (talk) 14:24, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
  Comments by Hchc2009: 
 I'd oppose on the basis of the sheer number of images; in one case, as many as six images for a single paragraph section. The result detracts from the underlying article, which I generally enjoyed. Hchc2009 (talk) 19:44, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
 
Have reduced the no. of images per row, max 5. Have culled images. Chiswick Chap (talk) 21:30, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
  Delegate's comment — There are too many images. This one in particular is purely decorative. File:Aline Campos 1c.jpg. I cannot see this candidate succeeding without a radical cull. A few carefully chosen images should be enough to illustrate the facts. Graham Colm (talk) 23:31, 4 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Thankyou for the guidance. Images culled. Chiswick Chap (talk) 00:51, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
  Comments 
 Can the publication dates of books be placed after the books' names in parentheses? For example "the 1909 book Concealing-Coloration in the Animal Kingdom" → "the book Concealing-Coloration in the Animal Kingdom (1909)" --- done
"He showed by experiment that swallowtailed moth pupae (chrysalises) were camouflaged to match the backgrounds they were reared on as larvae (caterpillars)." → "He showed, by experiment, that swallowtailed moth pupae (chrysalises) were camouflaged to match the backgrounds on which they were reared as larvae (caterpillars)." --- done
"British army" → "British Army" --- done
"calves die before their first birthday." → "calves die within a year." --- done
"influenced Fashion from the time of the first world war onwards." → "influenced fashion for the time from the First World War onwards."
"In 1919, Chelsea Arts Club held a "Dazzle Ball". Those attending wore dazzle-patterned black and white clothing." Why is "Dazzle Ball" in caps? I suggest "In 1919, the attendants of a "dazzle ball", hosted by the Chelsea Arts Club, wore dazzle-patterned black and white clothing." --- done
"Illustrated London News" Italicise. --- done
"1885-1932" and "first world war" MOS. --- done
"His 1973 screenprint of a leafily-camouflaged tank, Arcadia, 1973" Repetition of 1973. --- done
"In the United States in the late 1960s and early 1970s, military clothing was often worn by anti-war protestors as a symbol of political protest" → "During the late 1960s and early 1970s in the United States, anti-war protestors often wore military clothing during demonstrations against the American involvement in the Vietnam War." 1) Am I right in assuming that the protesters were against the Vietnam War, or were they demonstrating against wars in general? 2) I don't understand how camouflage clothing was used as a symbol of political protest, wouldn't it make sense to not wear camouflage, since they were anti-war? --- done. Clarified with "ironically".
"plastic branches (see illustration)" What illustration? --- done
  ---Sp33dyphil ©hatontributions 05:13, 6 February 2013 (UTC) --- done, Chiswick Chap (talk) 09:25, 6 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Oppose. This article suffers from problems both at the organizational level and the prose level. Cryptic C62 · Talk 21:09, 6 February 2013 (UTC) 
 --- Sorry, I overlooked this. I believe the article is well organized and the prose fluent, but am very willing to make any changes that reviewers consider necessary, including those you have listed below, which I am actioning as quickly as possible. Chiswick Chap (talk) 21:39, 8 February 2013 (UTC) 
 There is a difference between language used in textbooks and language used in encyclopedias. "consider the Common Cuckoo, a brood parasite." is an example of the former. This should be avoided. *: done
Avoid one- and two-sentences paragraphs, such as that which appears at the end of Mimesis and Eliminating shadow
done
Nope, not done. Check the Lying still, Transparency, and Fashion sections. --Cryptic C62 · Talk 19:10, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
  --- Lying still: have extended section with additional examples 
 --- Transparency: merged paragraphs 
 --- Fashion: merged paragraphs 
 Why does the Crypsis section have a bulleted list of the subsections? This is redundant with the table of contents; the bulleted list simply takes up space.
  --- removed 
 Decoration, keeping still, lying flat It doesn't make sense for this to be a section title, because these are three very different ideas. They should either be split into distinct sections, or the name of this section should be shortened to a single phrase which summarizes the overall idea (if one exists).
  --- sections split 
 I see hyphens where there should be en dashes in the footnotes.
  --- done 
 Why is an entire paragraph of the lead dedicated to non-camouflage material? None of this content appears in the body of the article, and it shouldn't, as it is not directly related to the topic.
  --- removed 
 "as with young Giraffes" Why is "Giraffes" capitalized?
  --- lower case 
 "zebra stripes include what Tim Caro calls" Who is this guy?
  --- clarified (zoologist reviewing the literature) 
 It does not make sense to me that there so much content and so many images relating to military camouflage in the Mimesis and Crypsis sections when there is an entire top-level section dedicated to Military. I would think that a much more logical organization would be to strip Mimesis and Crypsis of military content, then place them under a heading called Biology or In nature.
  --- This is because these sections describe principles which apply to anything - living or not - that are to be camouflaged. We would need to refer back to them from the Military section if they were in a Biology section. An alternative would be to have Principles, Biology and Military sections, all three, but then what would we use as examples of Principles? It seems logical to me to explain the principles with real examples, grouping text, diagrams, and photographs together. The military history clearly does not fit into that scheme, which is why it is separate. 
 --- (under discussion) 
 I don't see any information about amateur game hunters employing camouflage. This is a fairly obvious application of the concept that is somewhat distinct from military usage.
  --- Thank you, excellent suggestion. New section on non-military camouflage, existing cellphone paragraph and new hunting paragraph. 
 I don't see any information about camouflage in fiction. The concept has been explored extensively in science fiction films, books, and video games.
  --- Added an example from science fiction, another from literature. Please let me know if we should have more here; as in fashion, the list could become long. 
 The examples given in the 19th century origins section highlight that the use of camouflage was unusual at the time, but they don't answer a much more significant question that the reader is likely to have: Was it effective?
  --- There is unsurprisingly little hard evidence. I have added a description and reference to a rare early study by Charles Hamilton Smith in 1800 of the effectiveness of different coloured uniforms. 
 The Military section provides plenty of detail on the development of camouflage techniques, and the modern use of camouflaged equipment, but there is essentially no information provided on modern camouflage clothing or the techniques used to create it. I don't see any mention of "digital camouflage".
  --- added paragraph 
 "During the late 1960s and early 1970s in the United States, anti-war protestors often ironically wore military clothing during demonstrations against the American involvement in the Vietnam War." Relevance?
  --- added mention of symbolic significance, moved sentence to connect with existing mention of symbolism 
 Source review - spotchecks not done 
 "patterns such as "Berlin camouflage" are sometimes painted on vehicles intended for urban use" - source? --- removed
FN1: publisher, access date? --- done
FN2: page formatting --- done
Bibliography needs cleaning up. Don't mix cited and uncited sources. --- split off 'Further reading' section
FN6: publisher? Several sources seem to be missing this
Be consistent in whether you include locations for books --- done
FN6: for direct quotes page numbers are essential --- done
FN7: page(s)?
FN8: formatting
FN9: page formatting --- done
FN10, 11: publisher?
FN12: italics, missing page number
Use a consistent page formatting --- done
Be consistent in what order information is presented in citations.
  Give up and oppose - sorry, but the citations are just too messy for me to keep reviewing them at this point. Please make them consistent and include required information. Also, on a quick look I'm seeing WP:MOS errors in the article text, so that should be something else you look at for consistency. Nikkimaria (talk) 13:58, 8 February 2013 (UTC) 
 MOS issues so far detected have been done.
page refs formatted
bibliography restructured
other ref issues being addressed by reviewer.
Chiswick Chap (talk) 21:39, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
  Update: okay, I've fixed all issues with citations and MOS that I could find, and have also done some copy-editing of the prose and fixed a few images. Nikkimaria (talk) 03:57, 9 February 2013 (UTC) 
 
Thank you so much, it's appreciated. Chiswick Chap (talk) 09:15, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
  Comments. 
 "camouflet, a French term meaning blow smoke in someone's face.": It means "affront" these days, and I'm pretty sure it would have to be a noun no matter how far back you go (and thus couldn't mean "blow smoke"). - Dank (push to talk) 19:12, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
  --- Indeed it's plainly a noun. Reworded as 'Smoke blown...' We did have 'as a practical joke' in there at one point, which goes with the 'affront'. 
 "Camouflage is a set of methods": Avoid non-falsifiable statements. (How would it not be a set?). I'd go with: any method.
  --- reworded as 'the concealment ... by any method...' 
 That's all for now. - Dank (push to talk) 19:19, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
 Many thanks. Chiswick Chap (talk) 19:47, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): — ΛΧΣ21 18:13, 3 February 2013 (UTC)
  Gravity Bone is a freeware first-person adventure video game developed by Brendon Chung under his video game studio, Blendo Games, and released in August 2008. The game was developed using a modified version of id Software's id Tech 2 engine—originally used for Quake 2—and incorporates music by film director Wong Kar-wai. Gravity Bone received critical acclaim from video game journalists. It was called "an experience worth playing", and received comparisons to games such as Team Fortress 2 and Portal. The game was praised for its cohesive story and atmosphere and its ability to catch the player's interest over a very short time span without feeling rushed or incomplete. With permission from delegate GrahamColm, I am nominating this article for featured status. Regards. — ΛΧΣ21 18:13, 3 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Note: This is a WikiCup nomination. The following nominators are WikiCup participants: Hahc21. To the nominator: if you do not intend to submit this article at the WikiCup, feel free to remove this notice. UcuchaBot (talk) 00:01, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
 Comment (as semi-involved, while I didn't work on this article, I'm working on its sequel and so sorta helping here). Brendan Chung (the one guy behind Blendo Games) has previously put free screenshots at my request of his other games (eg Atom Zombie Smasher) for purposes of WP. I don't know how much of a line I have to him directly nowadays (now that he's all "important" and stuff :) ) but will try to see if I can get him to do so. I don't expect this to hold up any issues on this FAC, since normally game screenshots are not replaceable with free, but this will probably help if I could. --MASEM (t) 14:35, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
Good news! I just got in touch with him, and he's put more shots from this game and his other ones up on Flickr under a free license. [3]. --MASEM (t) 23:16, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
So in terms of an image check, at this point, all images used are properly free - the game's logo is just typefaces and thus fails originality and uncopyrightable, and the two other images are appropriately free. --MASEM (t) 17:27, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
Yay. Thank you Masem for finding the free images :) — ΛΧΣ21 17:43, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
The gameplay section is a bit confusing to me. I don't get a clear sense of what players do beyond the fact that they're not told much. The thumbnail picture is the only place I learn that there is no HUD, certain details are repeated (At the end of the game, the player-controlled spy is killed by an unknown woman after chasing her through the last half of the second level. and Finishing the level triggers a set of final sequences of events and the game ends with the sudden death of the player's character.) and plot and gameplay are interwoven in I think a detrimental fashion; it might be better to go over the scant plot details first and then transition to a more fleshed out explanation of what players do. Der Wohltemperierte Fuchs(talk) 01:01, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
Okay. I will work on this tomorrow. — ΛΧΣ21 01:20, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
 Support : It generally looks good, were there any particularly critical reviews to give a balance or were they all generally positive in tone? Darkwarriorblake (talk) 23:23, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
They were all positive. I was surprised I didn't find any negative review of the game... — ΛΧΣ21 23:33, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
 Comment - Wong Kar Wai is a director, not a composer. The music may be lifted from one of his films, but he did not compose it. Chances are the lead is incorrect. - hahnchen 23:45, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
Fixed. It now reads " incorporates music from films by director Wong Kar-wai." — ΛΧΣ21 03:38, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
The same phrase and issue occurs in the Development section. Axem Titanium (talk) 04:44, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
 Support. I don't see further issues with the article. It surely does think that it meets the FA criteria. Good work ! — Tomíca(T2ME) 20:53, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
Thanks! :D — ΛΧΣ21 20:54, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Not bad at all. The only thing that really stuck out to me was the lead, second paragraph. "The game was praised for its cohesive story and atmosphere and its ability..." I think this should be either "cohesive story, atmosphere, and its ability" or "cohesive story and atmosphere, and its ability". --JDC808 ♫ 02:28, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
Thanks! I have fixed that now :) — ΛΧΣ21 02:39, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
Something else I just noticed. The lead, second paragraph says "A direct sequel, Thirty Flights of Loving, was released in 2012." but in the Sequel section, it says it's not a direct sequel. --JDC808 ♫ 04:27, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
Ups. Taken care of it :) — ΛΧΣ21 04:42, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
Still see an issue. Maybe I'm misunderstanding the term. Does "direct sequel" not refer to story? I always thought if it was a direct sequel, it was referring to its story. In the Sequel section, it says "The game, though not a direct sequel in story to Gravity Bone..." The page for Thirty Flights just says sequel. --JDC808 ♫ 04:55, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
True. Fixed then. — ΛΧΣ21 14:23, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
  ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘ 
 Support The only issues that I really saw have been fixed. Article looks good. :) --JDC808 ♫ 18:43, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 HUD should be wikilinked and not abbreviated.
Done this one. — ΛΧΣ21 21:19, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
"The first level of Gravity Bone is disguised as a tutorial system" - I think this is backwards. Isn't the tutorial system disguised as the first level?
Hmm, both ways work. I will use yours :)
In the lead, "an experience worth playing" is in quotation marks, implying a direct quote, but when this phrase is mentioned in the Reception section, it is not in quotes and the phrase does not appear in Onyett's article. Onyett's article is also specifically not called a review.
True, it is a preview or impressions. For grammatical and *makes sense* purposes, I changed it to preview. And, well, ups. I synthesized his comment there in a way I should not have. I have fixed this. Take a look :)
What is Game Tunnel and why is it reliable?
Game Tunnel was a website dedicated to independent games. It had editorial control and oversight, and was founded in 2002 by Russell Carroll. Carroll is a video game developer that worked as Game Director for Reflexive Studios. Website IndieGames covered him (as well as the studio) on this interview. Carroll, as wel as the site, Game Tunnel, seemes to be very significant at the indie gaming scece. IndieGames called Game Tunnel's GoTY awards as a "brilliant compendium". He has appeared at several Indie events talkign about development of games and game Tunnel GameSetWatch. Here is more coverage for the website: PR Web, Cinema Blend, World of Goo wins Game of the Year at Game Tunnel's 7th Annual Independent Game of the Year Awards (MCV United Kingdom), Aquaria wins Game of the Year at Game Tunnel's 6th Annual Independent Games of the Year Awards (MCV United Kingdom). Also, the website became a Magazine sometime in 2006, as reported by TGI Source, Broken Pencil. Game Tunnel's history has even been covered by Joystiq and GamesIndustry, the latter which named the website "one of the first websites that focused on the indie gaming scene." It was bough by Indie Game Magazine in 2011, as reported by GamesIndustry. I think that this is enough not only to meet reliability but notability. I should write an article about Games Tunnel. — ΛΧΣ21 21:19, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
"Citizen Abel" is not explained anywhere in the article, thus, it is confusing when his name is mentioned later, particularly in the Sequel section where the reader would have to know that the main char of Gravity Bone's name is Citizen Abel in order to understand the significance of the sentence.
The main character is not named Citizen Abel. What Citizen Abel is is explained in the Development section: "based on a series of Quake 2 maps entitled Citizen Abel".
If that's the case, they you have to explain that in 30 Flights, "Citizen Abel" refers to the main character's name, not a Quake 2 map. Axem Titanium (talk) 06:05, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
Then yes; I'd have to fix that. The developer of the game, Brendon Chung, said that Citizen Abel is not the name of the character. He also said that the character has no name. I think this is pretty easy to understand from the development section. Also, I see that Masem mistakenly wrote that Citizen Abel was the character on the Sequel section. I have fixed that. — ΛΧΣ21 19:25, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
  This is a great little article about a great little game and I applaud you for attempting to improve it. I would love to support when these comments are addressed. Axem Titanium (talk) 04:44, 9 February 2013 (UTC) 
 I will take a look at the rest tomorrow. — ΛΧΣ21 05:14, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
Looks good. There are some other issues by other reviewers, but I'm confident they will get addressed. Support. Axem Titanium (talk) 23:42, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
Thank you! I will diligently solve the rest of the issues :) Sorry if I sounded a bit harsh at first, it was not my intention. — ΛΧΣ21 23:51, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
 [edit] Source Spot-check 
 I've checked the first few sources in the article, and have already found several problems. In the gameplay section, the source does not mention that the player character is a spy. This source doesn't say anything about chasing a woman, or the player character being killed by her. Also, while the reviewer of that source said he did not understand the plot, this does not support the claim that "The game was designed to keep the plot elements as scarce as possible." --FutureTrillionaire (talk) 19:34, 8 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Yeah. I am still dealing a bit with them to make sure they are accurate. Although, some plot elements don't need to be sourced, per the common guidelines from the Wikiproject. — ΛΧΣ21 03:37, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
A primary source cannot support a statement such as "The game was designed to keep the plot elements as scarce as possible", unless it's actually mentioned in the game what the developers' intentions were.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 03:57, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
I was not talking about that one. I am looking for the ref that covers that one in the list :) — ΛΧΣ21 04:56, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
Fixed. — ΛΧΣ21 05:32, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
Only as a comment to help (I don't know immediately off the top of my head), some of the sourcing for Thirty Flights may help towards clarifying these. --MASEM (t) 19:17, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
  For the development section, in the interview, Chung didn't exactly say he had a "passion for films" in general. He said he liked Wong's films specifically. This should be clarified. Also Wong is the guy's last name, not Kar-wai. All the "Kar-wai"s in the article should be changed to "Wong".--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 02:11, 11 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Okay. I will take care of this after the Grammys are over :) — Hahc21talk 02:14, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
Okay. I have taken care of this. Thanks! — Hahc21talk 15:26, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Support (stumbled here after checking out my FAC) 
 Take care of the unsourced statement.
I will, sir :) Unsource statement removed. Don't know from where I took that.
Could you explain somewhere what "Citizen Abel" is? I see "and was based on a series of Quake 2 maps entitled Citizen Abel" - but that doesn't explain why it's in the image at the top-right of the article (or does it?!)
I will try to better explain what does Chung said about this. I am tired of seeing sources stating that Citizen Abel is the name of the character. I believed it was the name of the character too until Chung explicitly statet that the character had no name, and that Citizen Abel was... well, read it on the article when I fix it :P
I think it should still be clearer. --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 02:34, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
I did my best to explain it clearer on the gameplay section. — ΛΧΣ21 03:27, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
It was called "an experience worth playing" - by whom?
Hmmm *goes and looks at the sources* Fixed.
From the description, it seems the game is very short, with two levels. Is that right?
Yep :) Two levels, 15-minute playthrough. Pretty short indeed.
I think the game's brevity should be emphasized somewhere. --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 02:34, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
I added a mention of its length on the Gameplay section. — ΛΧΣ21 03:14, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
"The player controls a spy" - probably add "unnamed" here.
Oh gosh, Indeed. Fixed.
Err, given what I've read elsewhere, is that correct? Are you sure Citizen Abel isn't the character's name? --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 02:34, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
Err, Brendon Chung clearly stated on the interview: "It was based on a series of Quake 2 maps I did ten years ago called 'Citizen Abel'." He also stated, when asked if "In Gravity Bone, do you play Citizen Abel, or is that just a reference to your old maps?", that "That doesn't really play a part in the game. You never really see the character, the character never talks, it's just a label I had." With this, it is clear that the character is not named Citizen Abel. — ΛΧΣ21 03:14, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
You have three consecutive sentences starting with "Cheng" in "Development" :/
Will take care of this :) Fixed.
Given you had " as an experience worth playing" quoted in the lede, it should probably be quoted down in "Reception".
I will, thanks for noting that too. Fixed. See above.
I didn't say you had to get rid of that quote, though. --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 02:34, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
it was original research... not a quote &gt;.&lt; — ΛΧΣ21 03:08, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
Were there any number reviews (aside from The Refined Geek)? Like 9/10? Stars? Thumbs up?
Nothing :/ Just positive comments with the exception you noted below.
And speaking of The Refined Geek - "awarding them a score of 8 out of 10 " - was that for each game, or for the series as a whole?
For each game :)
That should be emphasized then. I'd say "awarding them each a score..." --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 02:34, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
Done. — ΛΧΣ21 03:14, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
commenting, "The cohesiveness - should "the" really be capitalized here?
No. Will fix that. Fixed.
Did the game get any mention in any newspapers? Everything seems to be online. Also, was there any negative reception?
No, it was not mentioned in newspapers; and sadly, no, all reviews were positive.
Well, I did a Google news search anyway - here is a simple Google news search that shows some more hits on the game, some of which foreign language, but one English (including [http://web.archive.org/web/20110412224605/http://www.giantbomb.com/profile/murdouken/free-indie-games-that-are-pretty-god-damn-awesome/30-56917/ one with a review of 9/10, so that 8/10 review wasn't the only one with a number score). --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 02:34, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
GiantBomb is not reliable :/ — ΛΧΣ21 03:07, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
How is that not reliable, but Refined Geek is? I didn't think video games had many reliable sources :P ♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 16:24, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
Weird thing and big discussion at WP:VG. Result is that, given the lack of proper editorial oversight, GiantBomb cannot be used at FA level :) — ΛΧΣ21 17:22, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
I notice, in the entire article, you don't say where the game was released, and how. You say it was released on Windows in the infobox, but there isn't a source or mention of that. Was the game really not available on a Mac? And how did people purchase it? And for what price?
The game is free, available on the developer's website, blendogames.com. It was not sent to Steam, not released under a price. It has no Mac version, or any other version but Windows. It's a very indie release that got the attention of the mainstream VG websites for its unique style etc :)
Is any of that in the article? The first sentence says it's freeware, but I don't see where in the body of the article (and with what source) it says it's free. --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 02:34, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
  Just some missing details that I think the article needs. --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 19:39, 9 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Answered some. I will fix the rest as soon as I get ready to on my PC. — ΛΧΣ21 19:47, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
Alright, thanks for the replies. I supported, but still had a question over GiantBomb. ♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 16:24, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): Acroterion (talk) 17:51, 3 February 2013 (UTC)
  I visited Biscayne National Park briefly in November 2012, and realized that it had a fascinating history and situation. How many national parks in the US are 95% water, have a nuclear power plant just outside the boundary, are regularly whacked by hurricanes, were pirates' lairs, have four distinct ecosystems, and were the playground of the rich and famous? The version I started with [4] didn't tell that story. The developed version has been peer-reviewed by Brianboulton, whose comments were encouraging, and I've had the help and advice of MONGO, an experienced writer of FAs on protected areas. I've done a check for copied public-domain material that was once prevalent in these sorts of articles, and I'm confident that none remains. Acroterion (talk) 17:51, 3 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Image review 
 Check grammar on Geography captions
Where possible, use a specific PD tag rather than the general USGov tag - for example, the "safety valve" image should use {{PD-USGov-DOC-NOAA}}. Nikkimaria (talk) 13:48, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
Tags updated. I've removed an elderly low-resolution image that was more decorative than otherwise (and not very much at that) and replaced it with the hurricane landfall. I've never been that enamored of the infobox sunset image on the same grounds, and am thinking of replacing it with an underwater view. Acroterion (talk) 15:18, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
 Comments - I read this through once on my phone while at the gym...will jot any queries below - looking promising....Casliber (talk · contribs) 12:43, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
 
Try to amalgamate the text in the Bay waters section into 2-3 paras. Might rejig the order of some of the sentences to get a good flow.
 
Same with Coral reef and offshore waters (2 paras this time)
 
Try to avoid standalone sentences, like the last one in Climate - can we tack it on somewhere (or expand it?)
In the Exotic species section, I'd remove the first sentence and replace it with the second para's first sentence, which repeats the material but is more precise.
 
 Nominator(s): Dumelow (talk) 09:56, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
  I have been working on this article on and off for the past two and a bit years. I feel it is now as complete as I can make it and a potential FA. It recently passed a MilHist A-class review and was peer-reviewed prior to that. It has been almost four years since my last FAC so I might be a little rusty on the guidelines! I tend to be quite busy during the week but will catch up on any comments here at the weekends. Many thanks, I hope you enjoy reading the article - Dumelow (talk) 09:56, 2 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Support on prose per standard disclaimer, after some tweaks. I've looked at the changes made since I reviewed this for A-class. These are my edits. - Dank (push to talk) 03:07, 3 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Sources and images - spotchecks not done 
 File:General_Lyautey-Pirou-img_3150.jpg: page number? Any idea of date photo was taken?
 
I didn't upload so I don't know what page number it came from. I have taken a look at the photo and dated it to 1908-9 as Lyautey is wearing the insignia of a grand officier of the Legion of Honour (which he was awarded in 1908) and the photographer died in 1909 - Dumelow (talk) 09:01, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
 File:030Arab.jpg: source link appears dead. When/where was this first published?
 
I was not the uploader so cannot be sure. I have been troubled by this image for some time, not knowing the date or place of publication/creation and the multiple licenses makes it hard to defend as definitely PD. As it is only tangential to the article I have removed it - Dumelow (talk) 09:14, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
 
Not sure, the Google Books preview does not provide page numbers and I do not own a physical copy of this book - Dumelow (talk) 08:28, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
 
See his bio here. He is a doctor of history and an associate professor at Santa Clara University with peer reviewed publications and a couple of history books to his name - Dumelow (talk) 08:28, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): Deoliveirafan (talk) 03:58, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article because a lot of work has gone into the article from several editors who all deserve credit for it. I think it is currently in great shape and would be an interesting choice as a Featured Article. I'm willing to work on the page if requested, but may need a little time to re-order my sources from the local library. Deoliveirafan (talk) 03:58, 2 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Tend to oppose The plot section is huge, and does not follow WP:FILMPLOT.--Dwaipayan (talk) 16:43, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
If it was shortened would you have any other objections?--Deoliveirafan (talk) 03:14, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
 
I have not read other parts of the article. My objection was solely based on the plot section. If the plot is shortened, I would remove my oppose.--Dwaipayan (talk) 04:06, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
OK, I'll have it shorter by this weekend. Also, you should read the rest at this point. The irony of all this is funny.--Deoliveirafan (talk) 03:12, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
Its shorter now.--Deoliveirafan (talk) 20:05, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): Khanassassin ☪ 20:01, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
  After what I believe was an unfair non-promotion of Broken Sword 1 last time, I once again bring the article to FAC. Khanassassin ☪ 20:01, 1 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Comments Not bad, but still a few issues:
"In 1994 Cecil and Noirin Carmody met with Sean Brennan, then-head of publishing at Virgin Interactive, and Virgin agreed to publish the game.[9] Despite publishing the PC version Virgin were not interested in publishing the game on the PlayStation, feeling that only 3D games would sell for the console.[10] As a result Cecil contacted Sony Computer Entertainment, who agreed to publish the game for the console.[10]" - too many occasions of "publish", try replacing some (issue, release, etc)
"humour-based adventure games" - could be simply "humorous"
"Cecil's intention was to make the game more cinematic.[11] Although aiming to design a game with a cinematic feel," - same meaning of both phrases.
If possible convert 1 million pounds to US dollar, using {{convert}}
This should probably remain un-converted, as it was most likely not exactly the same ammount of many, but "circa" million pounds, so the conversion would not necessarily be accurate. --Khanassassin ☪ 21:13, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
In the first paragraph of Reception, try summarizing what the majority liked on the game
Overall looks fine.--Tomcat (7) 20:50, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
 Support in my opinion the article meets all criterions. Regards.--Tomcat (7) 10:31, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
Note: This is a WikiCup nomination. The following nominators are WikiCup participants: Khanassassin. To the nominator: if you do not intend to submit this article at the WikiCup, feel free to remove this notice. UcuchaBot (talk) 00:01, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
  Comments from JDC808 
 Done some copy-editing, particularly punctuation issues (I like serial commas). There was also an issue in the lead where "from 2009 to 2012" was at the beginning and end of the same sentence. A couple of typoes as well. Also linked a couple of things for clarity.
Reception section, first paragraph. "and it received the award for "Best Quest" from the magazine Quest" The last paragraph has a listing of awards. I'd say make an "Awards" subsection under Reception and put all of its awards/nominations there.
Under Legacy&gt;Listings, second paragraph, this is rather random and out of place, "In 2011, remakes of the first two Broken Sword games were downloaded by over four million people."
 
Moved to Reception section. --Khanassassin ☪ 12:20, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
  --JDC808 ♫ 06:06, 2 February 2013 (UTC) 
 In the new Awards section, the last sentence is about sales, move it up with Reception (the very end of Reception would probably be okay, just remove "Charles").
You don't have to do this, but I find the "Awards" that are on the Reception box unnecessary since the section includes them. --JDC808 ♫ 18:54, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
The section also includes the reviews, I guess we should remove the whole table. :P --Khanassassin ☪ 19:00, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
 
No, there's a difference. The Reception box tells what scores the reviewers gave. In the section itself, it doesn't say "this reviewer gave this score", it summarizes points of their review. --JDC808 ♫ 19:13, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
The table doesn't say "In 1997, Broken Sword was awarded "Best Quest" by the magazine Quest", but "Quest - Best Quest". :P --Khanassassin ☪ 19:20, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
That's not my point (my point is that it's redundant), but okay. And if you're going to point that out, the other award in the box is repeating what the section says - "Génération 4 awarded it "Best Adventure 1997"" and "Génération 4 Best Adventure 1997" --JDC808 ♫ 19:34, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
  ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘Support Although I disagree with having the awards also listed in the Reception box (as made evident above this post), the rest of the article is pretty good. My other issues were addressed and fixed accordingly. Other than needing a source spotcheck, I don't see much holding it back. --JDC808 ♫ 23:26, 2 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Comment - The alternate title for the US version of the game is not sourced anywhere in the article, I can see ref titles in the references saying it but it isn't in the article content itself. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 23:49, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
This uses it four times. --JDC808 ♫ 04:47, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
  Comment -The ref with this url http://revolution.co.uk/bs1dc/store is a deadlink.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 02:36, 10 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Nominator(s): Neelix (talk) 19:57, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article because, since the previous nomination, this article has undergone an independent copyedit by Guild of Copy Editors member Lfstevens. I believe that all of the concerns raised in the previous nomination have been addressed and the article now meets the featured article criteria. Neelix (talk) 19:57, 31 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Quick reference comment Some references are missing some information. For example, reference 43 needs more information (e.g. the page, body, maybe volume, publisher, etc). Carefully check all references and complete them if something is missing. Also, remember that only newspapers and magazines should be italicized; I am seeing a television network italicized when it shouldn't. I will give you a full review today or this weekend. Regards. — ṘΛΧΣ21 21:48, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 
I have gone through the references and filled out the information for reference 43 and others. I have also unitalicized the citations for sources other than newspapers and magazines. Thank you for offering to do a full review. Neelix (talk) 02:13, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): Darkwarriorblake (talk) 15:42, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
  Hello kiddies, Joker here, welcome to the last Featured Article nomination of your lives, but as my old pop used to say...if you gotta support one FAC nomination, do it with a smile. At least I think that's what he said, I do prefer to keep my options open after all. Let me tell you allllllllllllll a little story about why you should support this FAC nomination, don't worry about the poison gas or the explosives they're just decorative. Honest. The article as you can clearly see is detailed and fully comprehensive of the material, an oh-so-snug size in terms of prose, uses images effectively and not overzealously, is well-written, and encompasses all available and sourced information, and I do so love sourced information. Reminds me of my first henchman, he was a gas! Or a gun, a knife? Who cares, guy was a loser anyway. Anywayyyy... Oh I can't take all the credit, though I certainly tried, I have to thank User:Grapple X, User:Y2kcrazyjoker4, User:-5-, User:JHunterJ, User:Masem and...Cluebot NG? Hmm... now that's crazy! Read, and hopefully you will love and support! - Joker (really this guy-&gt; Darkwarriorblake (talk) 20:48, 22 December 2012 (UTC)) 
 Support as per previous FAC rationale. --JDC808 ♫ 21:49, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 [edit] Source spot-check by FutureTrillionaire 
 I'll take a look at this. The source used in the infobox for the European Wii U release date does not mention Nov 30, 2012. In fact, the source doesn't talk about Wii U at all.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 14:10, 2 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Fixed. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 14:27, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
  The 2 sources[5][6] used for the first few sentences in the Gameplay section do not mention anything related to "stealth", "beat 'em up tactics" or a freely movable "camera".--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 14:57, 2 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Done. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 17:51, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
  In the gadgets part, the source used does not mention the "grapnel gun". Also the claim "The game incorporates more puzzle elements than its predecessor" is not supported by the source used (I've checked all 3 pages of the source), or the other source at the end of the paragraph. --FutureTrillionaire (talk) 18:44, 2 February 2013 (UTC) 
 The first one is referenced as the Batclaw in the source, the writer not paying much attention, in-game it is on-screen labeled as the Grapnel gun, they're the same thing. Removed the second statement about puzzles. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 19:17, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
  In the part about detective vision, the source does not specify that the "navigational element" is toned down compared to the previous game. In the next paragraph, the statement "Batman must rescue a civilian hostage held in one of the Riddler's many death traps" does not seem to be entirely supported by either of the 2 sources at the end of the paragraph.[7][8] Also, for the next paragraph "Primary" and "secondary" missions and "Freeflow combat system" don't seem to be discussed in any of the 3 sources used.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 01:07, 3 February 2013 (UTC) 
 
Ugh, I didn't write most of the Gameplay section and now I'm paying for it. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 01:39, 3 February 2013 (UTC)
The Freeflow Combat part seems to be covered in the last paragraph of Ref 22, it's just not referred to as Freeflow Combat, sorted the mission problem. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 02:35, 3 February 2013 (UTC)
  "(Combat map)" and "(Predator map)" should be removed because not only are they unnecessary, those are not terms used by the source provided. In the part about Catwoman, the 2 sources used [9][10] do not seem to mention that Catwoman was included with the original PC version. Also, the statement "Her combat emphasizes agility and allows for the use of unique weapons such as clawed gauntlets, bolas, and the iconic whip" is not supported by either of these 2 sources [11] [12] (except for the part about the whip).--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 04:49, 3 February 2013 (UTC) 
 
Sorted. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 13:00, 3 February 2013 (UTC)
  The claim "Robin has his own main story narrative" is not supported by the source. For the part about the length of the game, the source says the main mission will last for 20-25 hours, not 25. Also, the source doesn't say aynthing about "15 hours for side missions". For the number of Riddler trophies, the source says there's 400, not 440. If there is indeed exactly 440 trophies, and the number used by the source is an approximation, then either another source needs to be added for the 440 claim, or the sentence can be changed to something like "The game contains approximately four hundred Riddler challenges..."--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 15:20, 3 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Fixed. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 16:10, 3 February 2013 (UTC)
  The statement "Rather than relying on maps, the player can mark Riddler puzzles as they are found and return to them later" doesn't seem to be supported by any of the sources used in the paragraph. The statement that says that TriOviz for Games Technology is integrated with Unreal Engine 3 is not mentioned in the source.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 18:01, 3 February 2013 (UTC) 
 
Done. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 23:00, 3 February 2013 (UTC)
  In the characters section, "Kane", the guy who got replaced, is not mentioned in the source. Either remove the Kane part, or provide a source that says that Kane voiced for the previous game. "Jack Ryder (James Horan)" needs a citation. Victor Zsasz is mentioned in the source, but the voice actor Danny Jacobs is not. "Poison Ivy (Tasia Valenza)" is in a similar situation, although this one is also using a primary source. Behind the Voice Actors.com, the source used for Alfred, is not a good source to use (see Wikipedia:Reliable sources/Noticeboard/Archive 86#Behind the Voice Actors.com RS?). It looks like all the character source problems here can be solved by using the 2 gamezone sources [13][14]. I also reccommend removing the behind the voice of actors source and that primary source.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 00:41, 4 February 2013 (UTC) 
 I have to disagree on Behind the Voice Actors. The information is not controversial, the site is not user edited and they only add information they can source through contact with the person/their staff/or credits. Sadly the people behind Arkham City thought that having us play a guessing game would be the fun thing to do. I contacted BTVA personally and this is the response I received:
 
"Mark,
Thanks for the inquiry! No our content is absolutely not user submitted. We rely on end credits or direct contact with the voice directors, voice actors or people involved with the production of the tv show, movie or game.
Now, that being said we have not completed the process of verifying ALL of the 80,000+ credits on the site because well to be honest that takes a lot of time. You can tell which ones we have publicly verified by noticing if the credit has a green check mark on the page like you see here:
http://www.behindthevoiceactors.com/video-games/Batman-Arkham-Asylum/
The person in charge of the Arkham City game has apparently not uploaded the credit images/confirmation at this point but I will contact him so he gets that up so you will be able to see exactly where we got our information from.
Thanks, and please let us know if you have any other questions or need further explanation.
We also have no problem with you referencing/linking to our pages if you need to for citation reasons.
- BTVA Admin Team"Darkwarriorblake (talk) 04:18, 27 December 2012 (UTC)
 I believe it is reliable for this purpose. The gamezone reference is useful for some information which is reflected elsewhere, but some parts are inaccurate such as it claiming that Quinton Flynn voices Nightwing when Nightwing has no voice, BTVA doesn't have that issue. I'll look at the rest. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 00:55, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
Interesting, but for the Alfred part, BTVA does not have a green check mark on Jarvis, meaning it has not been verified. Therefore, for at least that part, this source can not be used.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 01:12, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
K, I changed things but I'll admit I'm not happy about having to remove BTVA, there's no reason to question it's reliability and the information it is sourcing is not controversial or contested. And it's literally the only place on the entire internet that contains the information in one place and isn't user submitted. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 02:19, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
  It looks like BTVA doesn't have a green check mark for LaMarche voice acting Calender man either, so that source can't be used. Again, the Gamezone source can be helpful here. Kari Wahlgren is not mentioned in the source The twitter source for Killer Croc should be removed because there's already a better source cited. --FutureTrillionaire (talk) 14:49, 4 February 2013 (UTC) 
 You're breakin' my balls, but fixed. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 21:45, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
  In the settings section, I don't see any of the sources used describing Strange as "genius". This adjective should be removed unless a source can be found to support it. There's no citations in the plot section, which I'm guessing is just using primary sources. Per Wikipedia:WikiProject Video games/Sources#Video games, this is discouraged. Here's the GameSpot walkthrough, I think it might help. I'd like to see a citation should be added at the end of each paragraph, even if all the citations come from one source.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 00:41, 5 February 2013 (UTC) 
 I've done what I can, there are no references that cover all or even some elements of the plot unless they are forums and FAC film articles do not need their plots referencing. Is there any chance that this is an RS because it covers a bunch of stuff. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 02:13, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
Considering that there are other VG FAs that rely solely on primary sources for the plot, I'm not going to be very strict about this. The section now looks good enough to me. As a side note, I have an big test on Thursday, so I can't continue this review for a few days. Sorry about this.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 16:43, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
OK, you've taken time to respond to the FA Nom, that's good enough. You pointed out a lot of issues with Gameplay, almost entirely (apart from the rotating camera) parts that I didn't write and trusted in others to have sourced properly, so it's improved. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 16:46, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
  Hey, I'm back. Here are some more issues I found. The statement "By the time they had programmed Batman to dive and glide between buildings of the asylum, the adaption of the gameplay to the city was considered natural" doesn't seem to be supported by the source, which says "As soon as we had Batman diving off rooftops and gliding between buildings, we knew that we had made the right decision to take the action to the streets." The claim that the studio "only went forward with [new features] that they felt would be authentic to Batman" doesn't seem to be supported by that source either. I'm not sure why these two sources are being used.[15][16] Both are outdated don't support the statement that Rocksteady Studios denied the rumors concerning multiplyaer. The statement "Rocksteady expanded its workforce from 75 to over 100 people" is not supported by the source.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 16:07, 8 February 2013 (UTC) 
 
The only difference between "As soon as we had Batman diving off rooftops and gliding between buildings, we knew that we had made the right decision to take the action to the streets." and what is in the article seems to be the word "natural" and "right decision to take action to the streets", I can change "natural" if you want but it, to me at least, seems to be making the same point.
"only went forward with [new features] that they felt would be authentic to Batman" -&gt; in source " The most important thing for us is that players genuinely feel like Batman when they play the game, and so every creative decision that we take is made with that in mind. Then, once we have a feature in place, we ask ourselves, "Does that make me feel like Batman?"
The amount of staff was on page 2, fixed the rest. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 16:42, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
  In the marketing section, there doesn't seem to be a source for the Facebook and Twitter take over. There are 4 sources placed at the end of the second paragraph in the Pre-order bonuses section. Are all 4 really necessary? Also, the Joystiq source says that the source for the skin is no-longer exclusive to Best Buy, so Best Buy should be removed from the sentence. --FutureTrillionaire (talk) 19:04, 8 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Done. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 20:58, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
  In the Retail editions section, "Silver Age Batman skin DLC" is not mentioned in the source.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 22:24, 8 February 2013 (UTC) 
 It should've said Bronze Age of Comics (His outfit from 1970-1985), in the source it calls it 70s Batman, similar to the Preorder source which calls it 1970s Batman. I've replaced the existing source for the preorder with a better one, left the retail one but corrected the Silver Age to Bronze Age. If you think it is unfair to call it Bronze Age if the source doesn't explicitly name it that, let me know and Ill change them both over to just say 1970s Batman, just using Bronze Age because it's searchable what he looked like where 1970s Batman is a bit more broad a term. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 22:46, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
  In the Downloadable content section, Xbox 360 and PS3 are not mentioned in either of these two sources.[17][18] Also, the claim that originally "the missions were presented as part of the main game" doesn't seem to be supported by the two sources. I can't tell if this statement "Users can also purchase the content separately" is supported by those two sources either.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 01:13, 9 February 2013 (UTC) 
 
  The Robin pack challenge maps and skins are not supported by the source. Also, I'm think some of the info in the Downloadable content section is repeating some stuff in the Gameplay section. The second-to-last paragraph in the Gameplay section is almost entirely about DLC content. I think that paragraph should be moved down to the DLC section, and trimmed to reduce redundancy.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 15:58, 9 February 2013 (UTC) 
 The Gameplay paragraph very briefly states their role in the game and mentions they are DLC so as to not give the impression they are a part of the game otherwise, it does not cover in the same detail the DLC section. the rest is done. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 16:47, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
  Some of the percentages in the first paragraph of the Reception section and in the reception infobox needs to be updated. Specifically, all 4 GameRankings percentages, and the Wii U Metacritic percentage.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 00:45, 10 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Done. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 09:36, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
  The claim that Games Masters called it "one of the greatest games ever conceived" doesn't seem to be in the source. Also, I can't find where in this source does it say that the reviewer thought the "B.A.T. system made certain battles too easy." --FutureTrillionaire (talk) 23:59, 11 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Nominator(s): Rahul Jain (talk) 03:54, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article because it has addressed all the concerns raised in its previous nomination and meets the Featured Article Criteria. Rahul Jain (talk) 03:54, 31 January 2013 (UTC) 
 
I have replaced that source with other alternatives. Rahul Jain (talk) 06:02, 3 February 2013 (UTC)
 [edit] Older nominations 
 Nominator(s): HJ Mitchell | Penny for your thoughts? 18:25, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
  This article, like my previous nomination, is the result of a microgrant from Wikimeda UK, who kindly purchased most of the books used in researching these articles. For nearly ten years, the West refused to get involved in the brutal and incredibly bloody civil war in Sierra Leone, until the rebels reneged on a peace agreement that everybody had hoped meant the end of the war. With the UN peacekeeping force on the brink of collapse in May 2000, the United Kingdom sent an entire battalion of paratroopers and its largest naval task force assembled since the Falklands War, setting in motion a chain of events that finally brought the war to an end. 
 The article has had a successful GA review and MilHist A-class review, and there might be a few relatively minor issues, but I'm reasonably confident that if it isn't quite at FA standard, it's very close. It's a relatively long article (c. 7,000 words), but I hope people will read it and find it interesting. Thanks, HJ Mitchell | Penny for your thoughts? 18:25, 27 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Comments by SchroCat Lead 
 Pipe Sierra Leone Army to Republic of Sierra Leone Armed Forces?
Specifically contra-indicated by WP:R2D, and the SLA could sustain an article of its own if somebody were to create one.
Should that be "Sierra Leonean army"?
It should be, yes, just like it should be "Sierra Leonean Civil War", but both are the correct proper nouns.
Not a problem: that's just what we called them when I lived out there in the 70s &amp; 80s (on the diamond fields, the cause of all this). - SchroCat (talk) 19:22, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
  An excellent article in a topic and area of the world often overlooked. Only a couple of minor points, which struck me, but if you're happy with the way you have them I'm not going to argue. Well done on this: it may be long, but it's a very comprehensive and tightly put together article. – SchroCat (talk) 09:09, 30 January 2013 (UTC) 
 
  Support Very nice article indeed. - SchroCat (talk) 19:22, 31 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Source review - spotchecks not done 
 Could we flip the order of general and specific refs?
Someone raised this at my last FAC and I don't see the problem, but if the current format really bugs people, I suppose I wouldn't fight over it.
FN10, 14, 30: page formatting
FN56: which Connaughton?
FN67, 99: punctuation
Abrahamsen: check authors
Don't know what happened there.
Connaughton 2002: missing location and publisher. Nikkimaria (talk) 18:40, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
  Comments 
 Support on prose per standard disclaimer. These are my edits. - Dank (push to talk) 02:15, 3 February 2013 (UTC)
But see User_talk:Dank#However. - Dank (push to talk) 00:18, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
I've just reviewed the nom's edits since I copyedited. I can't support, although it's not bad enough to oppose. If a copy editor wants to give it a look and ping me about anything, ping away. - Dank (push to talk) 13:24, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
Dan, you're a great copy-editor and I always appreciate your help with my articles, but not all the edits you made here were an improvement. I know you're trying to solve issues with readability and ambiguity, but some of your edits replaced one issue with another or introduced inaccuracies. Can we meet in the middle somewhere? HJ Mitchell | Penny for your thoughts? 15:55, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
I don't know, Harry, I'm sick today (which isn't helping my mood), I'll think about it tomorrow. - Dank (push to talk) 03:06, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
I'll stay in the "neutral" column. When you reverted some of my changes, you reinstated a number of things that we don't usually allow at FAC, so I can't support, but you've got two supports already so you should be fine. The delegates and many reviewers will spot the problems and help out. I apologize, I've got two huge projects this month and I'm taking a break from reviewing and copyediting. - Dank (push to talk) 10:56, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
 Support I commented on this article's A class review, and think that the FA criteria are also met. Nick-D (talk) 10:38, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): Futuretrillionaire (talk) 14:30, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article because I think most of the unresolved issues from the previous FAC has now been addressed, mainly source issues. I believe the article is now ready to be a FAC. --Futuretrillionaire (talk) 14:30, 27 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Were significant contributors consulted prior to nomination? SandyGeorgia (Talk) 06:25, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
I tried contacting some of them via their talk pages, but they didn't respond :/ Others don't appear to be active on WP anymore.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 16:01, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 
 Lead 
 How come Bethesda Game Studios isn't linked in the first sentence?
"a package including both Shivering Isles and the official plug-in Knights of the Nine" I was confused by what "plug-in" meant. I know what an expansion pack is (and found out that Knights is that after clicking on it), but wasn't sure what a plug-in was. Is there a page that plug-in could be linked to? You may also want to link expansion pack in case non-gamers don't understand what it is.
The rest is pretty good, albeit one question, is there more recent reports of its sales?
  Will be back later for other sections. --JDC808 ♫ 03:33, 28 January 2013 (UTC) 
 All done (lede). The lasted approximate sales figures I found was from November 2011.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 22:08, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
Please see WP:FAC instructions regarding "done" templates (removed). SandyGeorgia (Talk) 06:24, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Sorry, I'm new to the FAC process.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 16:01, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
  Gameplay 
 Can you give an example of one of the perks?
Wikilink first and third person view.
  Development 
 "oversaw a development team of 268." I'm assuming that's the amount of people. I didn't get that on the first read. Clarify with either "268 people" or "268 members".
Last paragraph of Game World. "For example, an NPC whose goal it is to find food", remove "it".
Under Additional Content. "At E3 2007, it was announced that the Game of the Year Edition for The Elder Scrolls IV: Oblivion would be released in September 2007.[43] In North America and Europe, the game was released in September 2007, for the Xbox 360 and PC," First thing, E3 is an undefined acronym (a non-gamer got on to me about it in a previous FAC). Second, was the GotY edition announced at E3 (as in there were no previous announcements for it)? If so, I'd say reword the first sentence to "At the 2007 Electronic Entertainment Expo (E3), the Game of the Year edition for Oblivion was announced." That'll remove the redundancy of September 2007.
  Soundtrack 
 Gonna back track slightly. In the lead, I'd say remove BAFTA, and spell out the acronym in this section. --JDC808 ♫ 02:23, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 
All done (Gameplay, Develoment, Soundtrack). For the "perks" part, I didn't provide an example, but I think I clarified the statement, making an example unnecessary. One thing I didn't do however, is the part you said about removing BAFTA from the lede. Is the award not notable enough? --FutureTrillionaire (talk) 21:00, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Okay. I'm not saying it's not notable enough. It's a great honor. I'm saying it's not necessary for the lead since he's won more than just the BAFTA award. It would sound more impressive to say "and features the music of award winning composer Jeremy Soule" instead of singling out BAFTA. I won't oppose if you don't remove it, that's just my opinion. I'll let you respond before I give my support. --JDC808 ♫ 22:45, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Ah, okay I see. I removed it. I suppose it does sound better that way. --FutureTrillionaire (talk) 22:52, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
  ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘Support All of my issues have been addressed and fixed accordingly. Good luck with the rest of the FAC and hope it passes. --JDC808 ♫ 23:01, 29 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Just some minor things all relating to or around the lede. 
 There is no explanation of what open world is for people not educated on video games, making it useless in the opening sentence and open world isn't a genre. Recommend removing it from there and moving the link to the first instance of "Open World" in the second paragraph where the explanation is present.
Also the extensive listing of release dates in the opening prose makes it look messy and is unnecessary, we have the infobox for that, we don't need to know that the PC version, released in 2006, was released through STEAM in 2009, it's not a console its a delivery method, Stick to the earliest release date of different formats
JP release dates don't belong in the infobox unless its a Japanese game or the release there is in someway notable
There is a mobile release date listed, but I assume this is not strictly the same game but some kind of adaptation? There is no mention of it at all in the article, but while I'm not super up on my phones, I can't imagine it is hte same game. If it is not the game as released on the other platforms then it probably doesn't belong in the infobox about that base game, and should be discussed in the prose either way.
Not a major thing and maybe someone else will think different, but similar to above issue, not sure why the Game of the Year release date needs listing in the infobox, its just a re-release of the base game with post-release content, and there are two separate large Game of the Year listings for two different formats.
The rest seems OK. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 18:34, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 
All done - I've trimmed the release info in the lede and put most of the infobox release dates under a collapsible list, as was done in Halo 2. I've also added info about the mobile phone release in the lede.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 16:38, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
OK, this seems to be the mobile version of the game. I do think that should be described in the prose somewhere, only briefly, even a sentence would do, just saying that type of game it is, since its basically a separate game with the same name. Other than that, I will support this. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 18:10, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
I'm not sure if this is enough, but added some info about the mobile version in the gameplay section: "Oblivion can be played in either a first- or third-person view, except in the mobile phone version, in which the game can only be played in isometric projection." --FutureTrillionaire (talk) 19:38, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Support I thought this was already a featured article, but I see i confused it with Morrowind. I have read this article several times and, for me, it is up to standard. Anyways, I will do a very thorough read again just in case I overlooked anything. — ΛΧΣ21 04:37, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 Lead
You have a quote with no citations on the third paragraph of the lead ("cutting-edge graphics")
" The game was developed with fully voiced characters" I think that "with" is not the right word here. You may want to say that "The game featured fully voiced characters". Also, is this for NPCs only? I don't remember the player character to talk; you have to state that too.
"Oblivion was well received" by who? Be a little more specific, Like "Oblivion was critically acclaimed, achievign a score of 94 at Metacritic" or something.
I think that mentioning how much copies it shipped in 2006 to then add a newer statistic is a bit of not needed. if I were you, I'd only stick with the 3.5m number on the lead.
Gameplay
"slay monsters"? I think that "slay" is not a word i'd use at an FA.
You explain what si Magicka and health, but not stamina.
"including standard fantasy monsters like imps and goblins" You may want to wikilink Imp and Goblin.
Synopsis
"The Emperor and the Blades head to a sewer that leads out of the city, using a secret entrance that is located in the player's cell." The next sentence doesn't make much sense if you don't state here that the prisoner (a.k.a. the player) was taken with them to the sewers. (Yes, I played the game XD)
"the group, joined by the player" I think that if you state (on the previous sentence) that the player followed then, you can avoid saying "joined by the player" here.
"had a dream containing the player" I think that containing is not the right word here.
More coming...
 
All done - For the sales number part, I changed the wording to emphasize the huge number sold within a month, rather than removing it. For the stamina part, I changed the term to fatigue (the term used in the manual), to avoid confusion. I also added some more info about alleviating fatigue--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 01:44, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): • Astynax talk; Lecen (talk) 04:48, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article because the existing article has been recently rewritten with the addition of images and better sources. • Astynax talk 04:48, 26 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Comment: Joaquim José Inácio, Viscount of Inhaúma was born in the Kingdom of Portugal in 1808. He served his entire life in the navy of the Empire of Brazil, leading it in the Paraguayan War that lasted from 1864 until 1870. --Lecen (talk) 11:53, 27 January 2013 (UTC) 
 A few comments on the lead prose:
 
" After Brazilian independence in 1822, Inhaúma enlisted to serve in the armada (navy) of Brazil." Is it right, in this context, to refer to him as "Inhaúma", when he did not acquire this title until 1867? The same applies to other statements in the lead. I note that in the article itself you call him "Joaquim Inácio" until his title is conferred.
"enlisted to serve..." The words "to serve" are redundant.
"during the latter half of the 1820s, he engaged in subduing secessionist rebellions". As worded, this suggests a major role which, in view of his youth, is unlikely. Suggest you soften to "participated in the subduing of..." or similar
"during that troubled period". In the interests of neutrality I would remove "troubled".
"He first saw action in the Sabinada between 1837 and 1838..." This will confuse readers, who have just been told he put down rebellions in the late 1820s, which is presumably where he first saw action.
"a couple years" is colloquial American English. It is not encyclopedic.
I am somewhat puzzled by the fourth paragraph, which summarises Inhaúma as hesitant, procrastinating, mentally exhausted and diseased, yet then says he is regarded as among the greatest Brazilian navy officers. Perhaps, rather than making so definitive a statement ("Inhaúma's leadership was encumbered by his hesitating and procrastinating behavior") you should qualify this, e.g. "some historians believe that..." etc.
  That's all I have time for at the moment. Will return if possible. Brianboulton (talk) 20:00, 27 January 2013 (UTC) 
 
Hi, Brian. It's good to see you. Now let's take a look at your comment:
He is called Inhaúma in the entire text of the lead for simplicity's sake. It's the same standard used in other similar articles such as Pedro II of Brazil, Luís Alves de Lima e Silva, Duke of Caxias, Manuel Marques de Sousa, Count of Porto Alegre, etc...
"enlisted to serve..." Fixed that.
"during the latter half of the 1820s, he engaged in subduing secessionist rebellions". Fixed as per your suggestion.
"during that troubled period". It was a troubled time the regency in the 1830s. It was regarded as such by contemporaries and historians. Don't worry, it isn't a controversial issue. In fact, nothing in the article or related to it it's controversial.
"He first saw action in the Sabinada between 1837 and 1838..." Fixed that by removing "first".
"a couple years" Changed for "two".
"I am somewhat puzzled by the fourth paragraph, which summarises Inhaúma as hesitant..." Merely because he was a brave officer and regarded by a few historians as one of the greatest in Brazilian history doesn't mean that he was devoid of flaws, right? And that is also uncontroversial. Even his superior, the Duke of Caxias complained about his behavior.
I hope you'll find time to take a look at the rest of the article. Thanks for your imput, --Lecen (talk) 00:45, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
I'm happy with these responses. As I say, I'll try to find time for a more detailed look. Brianboulton (talk) 18:50, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
  Comment (drive-by) - Inline source "Ouro Preto (1894)" lacks a full bibliographic entry in "References". GermanJoe (talk) 11:26, 28 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Thank you very much, GermanJoe. I added the missing book. --Lecen (talk) 11:50, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
  Comments. As always, feel free to revert my copyediting. Please check the edit summaries. - Dank (push to talk) 
 "30 July 1808, his mother claimed that the correct birthdate was the following day, on 1 August.": Wasn't that two days later? - Dank (push to talk) 01:03, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Now there is someone who is always a pleasure to see. Good to have you around, Dank. And yes, you are correct. I had forgotten that July has 31 days. --Lecen (talk) 03:20, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
Good to see you too, Lecen. - Dank (push to talk) 04:02, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
  Source review - spotchecks not done 
 Guedes: is this self-published? If so, what makes this a high-quality reliable source?
Lacombe: does this book have an ISBN? Nikkimaria (talk) 18:30, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 
The Lacombe book does have an OCLC, which is 30701799 (source is here). Brianboulton (talk) 23:09, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): —Ed!(talk) 13:00, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article. —Ed!(talk) 13:00, 24 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Sources are clear, no problems. Nikkimaria (talk) 18:09, 24 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Note: This is a WikiCup nomination. The following nominators are WikiCup participants: Ed!. To the nominator: if you do not intend to submit this article at the WikiCup, feel free to remove this notice. UcuchaBot (talk) 00:01, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
  Comments. As always, feel free to revert my copyediting. Please check the edit summaries. - Dank (push to talk) 
 "the local congressman's appointment to the academy": Not sure what that is ... his recommendation?
Fixed. —Ed!(talk) 01:46, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
Some words to search for that you sometimes use too often in the same paragraph: "also", "oversaw".
Fixed. —Ed!(talk) 01:46, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
Looks good. - Dank (push to talk) 01:51, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
So far so good on prose per standard disclaimer, down to where I stopped, about two-thirds of the way, at Arthur_W._Radford#Commander of the U.S. Pacific Fleet. These are my edits. This is much better, but I've got some big projects cooking and I can't spend as much time at FAC. I'll try to make time for another look later on, if you need it. - Dank (push to talk) 03:34, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): – Maky « talk » 16:02, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this short article for featured article because I feel that it meets all of the criteria. The article covers every source I can find on the subject. The only known exception is his burial record at Arlington National Cemetery, which would provide an interment date and grave location (section &amp; tombstone number). I will include the information if someone can suggest a proper citation, especially since I cannot link directly to the record, only to the database. (An image of the tombstone may also be in the public domain under PD-USGov, but I'm not certain and cannot get a response from Arlington National Cemetery.) Assistance on these two issues would be most welcome. If any other sources can be located, please send them to me and I will quickly incorporate them. 
 Lyon was not known for a single, major contribution to the sciences, but contributed about 160 papers over the course of his career. He named two of the slow loris species that were recently elevated to species status, and is the authority on several genera and species of mammals (including a ton of synonyms). In all, this should be a complete, short article about a lesser known naturalist from the early 1900s. – Maky « talk » 16:02, 23 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Image is PD and fine. Sources are fine except the title for Just should use an endash instead of a hyphen and there's a doubled period in Layne, so I'll have to strongly oppose because of those tremendously outrageous issues ;-) Apparently Notre Dame has his family papers, not sure if you could access those. There's also "first published plant lists of the Indiana Dunes, then notes on ground squirrels and badgers anticipating his 1936 opus on mammals of Indiana" in American Midland Naturalist (January 2009), 161 (1), pg. 13-44. Nikkimaria (talk) 18:07, 24 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Thanks for the source and image review. Fixes made as requested... Lol! Living in Atlanta, I don't have access to the Notre Dame library, and I'm not even sure how I would cite family papers if I could get them to send me digital copies. What kind of information would you like to get from them? Lastly, are you simply wanting a mention of those lists and notes (per this source)? – Maky « talk » 19:35, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
No, just mentioned them because you had wondered above about further sources. I don't think it's a big issue either way. Nikkimaria (talk) 01:01, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
Added the stuff from American Midland Naturalist as requested. – Maky « talk » 05:07, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 Comments from Ceranthor
 Lead
 Born in 1875 to a military family, he showed an early interest in zoology by collecting local wildlife around the army posts at which his father was stationed - I think the use of by makes this sentence awkward. Show and by don't mix well. Maybe at an early age he began collecting?
 
I'm not sure I see how this is awkward, but I have attempted to reword it. If the modifications are insufficient, please let me know. – Maky « talk » 17:55, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
 U.S. National Museum (USNM) - Is there a reason US isn't spelled out? Is this the traditional spelling or something?
 
Good point. Fixed in two locations. – Maky « talk » 17:55, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
 In 1919, he and his wife, Martha, moved to South Bend, Indiana to join a new clinic. - Why is it a "new" clinic? It's the first mention of a clinic I've seen.
 
Changed to "newly opened clinic". – Maky « talk » 17:55, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
 Following the move, he began to write more medical publications, - he began to write publications on medicine. More medical doesn't make sense as it is.
 
Fixed. – Maky « talk » 17:55, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
 Early
 His family moved between various army posts across the United States throughout his childhood, although there are few records documenting his early life. - The use of although is improper here; the second half doesn't contradict anything in the first half.
 
I'm having a hard time rewording this. I will revisit it soon. – Maky « talk » 17:55, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
I've attempted to reword this. Please let me know if it's better. – Maky « talk » 05:07, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 As a child, Lyon enjoyed collecting insects and other animals around the army posts,[1] particularly Watertown Arsenal near Boston, Massachusetts.[4] - This needs to be recast. As is, it reads as he enjoyed collecting Watertown Arsenal (collective noun for a type of insect) near Boston. I think adding an "at" would leave it too wordy. Better to reword this entirely.
 
I'm also having a hard time with this one, so I used your "at" idea for the time being. I'll revisit it soon. – Maky « talk » 17:55, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
I've attempted to reword this. Please let me know if it's better. – Maky « talk » 05:07, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 By the time Lyon was in high school, his father had been restationed at Rock Island Arsenal, and the young man graduated from nearby Rock Island High School. - This sentence doesn't proceed logically; it doesn't explain that Lyon moved schools (with his father), rather that he graduated from a different school.
 
Fix attempted. Please let me know if it is clearer. – Maky « talk » 17:55, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
 He attended Brown University and completed his Ph.B. in 1897, which included training in biology. - Unless I'm mistaken, the degree doesn't include training in biology, his studies did.
 
Good catch. Fixed. – Maky « talk » 17:55, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
 Career
 In 1898, he moved to Washington, D.C. and in conjunction with his graduate studies, he became a part-time Aid in the Division of Mammals at the U.S. National Museum (USNM), now the National Museum of Natural History of the Smithsonian Institution.[1] - I can't help but feel the "now" bit would be better as a footnote.
 
Footnote made. – Maky « talk » 05:07, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 He was sent to Venezuela in 1899 by the USNM, along with Lieutenant Wirt Robinson of the United States Army, to collect mammal specimens. - "He was sent to Venezuela with Lieutenant...Army in 1899 by...to collect mammal specimens." is better.
 
Thanks for the suggestion. I've used it. – Maky « talk » 05:07, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 despite continuing his education and taking on teaching assignments at Howard University Medical School.[1][2] He taught physiology from 1903–1904 and 1907–1909, as well as bacteriology from 1909 to 1915.[2] - No need to separate these sentences. Can be condensed to "and teaching physiology and bacteriology at Howard University Medical School from 1903-1904 and 1907-1909, respectively. The dates can go wherever you want, but the two sentences definitely should be combined.
 
Done, though the example you gave incorrectly attributed the dates. Because of the complex dates, I've put them in parentheses. I hope that is acceptable. – Maky « talk » 05:07, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 From his work as a mammalogist, Lyon is considered the taxonomic authority for the family - From is not the right word. Because of is better, but not perfect.
 
I never liked how this sentence started when I first wrote it, and I agree that "Because of..." is not perfect. But as before, I'm at a loss. If I think of something better, I will change it, but for now, I'm using "Because of..." – Maky « talk » 05:07, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 From his work as a mammalogist, Lyon is considered the taxonomic authority for the family Ptilocercidae (pen-tailed treeshrews).[6] He also is the authority for the genus Anathana (the Madras treeshrew)[7] and two genera of leporids (rabbits and hares), - These sentences should be combined.
 
Done. – Maky « talk » 05:07, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 Although he was never able to visit the Far East, he acquired a strong knowledge of the fauna and geography from studying the collections that were sent to the USNM.[16] Following the end of his relationship with the USNM in 1912, he not only began publishing basic medical studies, but also continued to publish mammalogy material.[1] - The first sentence here seems out of place, unless it is saying that his publications related to the Far East's fauna. Otherwise I think it's an unnecessary detail.
 
It does refer to his publications about Far East fauna. I have done my best to fix, but you may not like it. Please share you opinion. I am open to suggestions, too. – Maky « talk » 05:07, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 Despite his interest in and occupation with medical science, his passion was for the study of living and extinct mammals, which was reflected in how his contributions to mammalogy outnumbered his medical papers.[16] - "which was" and after reads like original research, and the readers can gather that themselves, anyway, even if it is sourced.
 
Good point. Deleted. – Maky « talk » 05:07, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 Personal life
 Lyon criticized poorly managed conservation programs in his paper "Conservation from the Naturalist's Point of View" (1939), and in his final paper, he envisioned life around the Kankakee Outwash Plain before human activities had changed it. Lyon also gave up his cottage in the Indiana Dunes after the wildlife refuge was converted into a vacation destination.[16] - What is his final paper? It's not clear.
 
Title provided. – Maky « talk » 05:07, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
  Weak Oppose - The prose is rather clunky and needs a copyedit. I can't help but feel that the article is at times a bit redundant to give it length, and becomes choppy. ceranthor 18:41, 25 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Sorry for the delayed replies/fixes. I have done my best to attempt the examples you pointed out above. I have also re-read the article but did not notice any other "clunky" prose... but then again, I'm not as good at copyediting as you are. If there are any other problems, please list them. Thanks for the review. – Maky « talk » 05:07, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
I think they've all been fixed pretty satisfactorily. The article still needs a copyedit of some form, though. ceranthor 21:56, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
Done. Let me know if there are particular places that need work. Suggestions are welcome. – Maky « talk » 04:36, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
  Comments from Kitchen Roll. 
 "Born in 1875 to a military family" --&gt; "Born into a military family" - no need to state the year of his birth again.
 
Good point. Done. – Maky « talk » 04:31, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 "At the same time, he taught medical classes at Howard University Medical School and later George Washington University Medical School." --&gt; "At the same time, he taught at Howard University Medical School and later George Washington University Medical School." - no need to say medical classes, as they are both medical schools.
 
Another very good point. Fixed. – Maky « talk » 04:31, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 "He attended Brown University and completed his Ph.B. in 1897, and his training included biology." --&gt; "He attended Brown University and completed his Ph.B. in 1897, which included training in biology."
 
Done. – Maky « talk » 04:31, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 "Because of his work as a mammalogist, Lyon is considered the taxonomic authority for the family Ptilocercidae (pen-tailed treeshrews), as well as the authority for the genus Anathana (the Madras treeshrew)" --&gt; "Because of his work as a mammalogist, Lyon is considered the taxonomic authority for the family Ptilocercidae (pen-tailed treeshrews), as well as the genus Anathana (the Madras treeshrew)"
 
Done. – Maky « talk » 04:31, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 "Until the move to Indiana, Lyon wrote many papers in the field of mammalogy, and particularly on the morphology, systematics, and zoogeography of mammals." - is the "and" necessary? ("mammalogy, particularly"). If it is the sentence still feels a bit clunky.
 
Changes made. Let me know if it's a little better. – Maky « talk » 04:31, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 "Following the end of his relationship with the USNM in 1912, he not only began publishing basic medical studies, but also continued to publish mammalogy material." - publish and publishing used in the same sentence feels awkward.
 
Changed one of them to "write". Good enough? – Maky « talk » 04:31, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 "articles collected by Lyon and his wife's scrapbook of her life in college." I can't make sense of this. Can it be reworded?
 
Changes made. Better? – Maky « talk » 04:31, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
  I agree with Ceranthor that the article needs a copyedit.  Kitchen Roll  (Exchange words) 14:51, 30 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Within the next few days, I plan to review WP:1A (a long, but helpful page written by a user to help people learn how to copyedit). I review that page about once a year. After that, I'll re-read the article and try my best to clean it up more. However, if you can point out any other issues, I'd appreciate it. Thanks for the reviews and suggestions! – Maky « talk » 04:31, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
Brilliant. Thanks for the quick response. I'll give the article another read soon.  Kitchen Roll  (Exchange words) 17:14, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): JDC808 ♫ 23:37, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article with permission from Graham Colm as given here. In the last nomination (also check the Talk page as some comments were moved there), the article received 3 supports and 1 oppose. The opposition was based on prose of the article (as that reviewer is not a "gamer" and some language she did not understand). In her last comment, she said the article was close. I'm hoping that the work that has been done since that comment has appeased her last comment (the nomination was closed before she could respond and she hasn't responded to a request to post on the article's Talk page). JDC808 ♫ 23:37, 21 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Support with one observation. The lede contains the sentence "As of June 2012, the game has sold more than 4.6 million copies worldwide." I assume this is physical copies? If so the date part is unlikely to change given the PS2 is no longer made, so it seems like you are making extra work for yourself by adding a dated statement that needs to be maintained for something that may never change. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 00:34, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Thanks for the support! It is true that the PS2 copy will never be made again. The date is because that's when Sony released the most up-to-date data for its sales (and the other games in the series). --JDC808 ♫ 00:59, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
 Support Per the previous FAC. — ΛΧΣ21 01:19, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Thanks again. --JDC808 ♫ 07:00, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
  Image check - all OK (problem image replaced and fair-use improved)Fair-use rationale of second image needs some work, but not unsolvable (infobox ok). 
 File:GOW_Gameplay_Kratos_vs_Hydra.jpg - has "To show an example of the game in play." as purpose. WP:NFCC #8 requires an image to "significantly increase readers' understanding of the topic, and its omission would be detrimental to that understanding.". A mere example image without additional context does not significantly increase readers' understanding. Some suggestions to improve the situation: 
 If the graphics are especially noteworthy (new graphic engine, special graphic style, ...?), note that in the rationale and caption.
Use another image instead with more specific features (f.e. the article discusses the QTE feature, which could use some visual help to grasp the concept. Or maybe the Rage function, if you can get a good shot of it.). The current image basically just shows the hero and a monster, the reader doesn't need the image to understand that.
Flesh out the caption a bit and point out specific, interesting details of the image.
  The videogame template's proposed rationales are too generic and probably only meant as first pointers. WP:NFCC clearly asks for specific, detailed rationales, so you need to adapt and expand them for your current usage. GermanJoe (talk) 09:01, 22 January 2013 (UTC) 
 
I replaced the image with one that was being used on the series page and fleshed out the caption. --JDC808 ♫ 21:51, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
The new image is a better choice for fair-use. Tweaked the rationale (you need a second, separate one for each article) and caption a bit more. All OK. GermanJoe (talk) 11:39, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
 Support pending the image rationale fixes requested by GermanJoe. I copy edited a few bits just now, and my comments in the previous FAC resolved a few source issues in the development section. I also checked sources in the release and awards sections in that FAC, for a total of 16 sources checked. I just checked the three sources in the soundtrack section, and those all looked fine as well. —Torchiest talkedits 17:38, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Thanks again. --JDC808 ♫ 21:51, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
 Support - Per previous FAC rationale.--Tærkast (Discuss) 21:50, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
Support - in accordance with the previous FAC rationale. Looks good to me. Hounder4 (Talk) 09:27, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Thanks to both. --JDC808 ♫ 18:19, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
 [edit] Comments from SandyGeorgia 
 We still have the acronym issue I mentioned in the last FAC: 
 
So, presumably SCE is Sony Computer Entertainment, but that is never stated. Then we have SCEI in an infobox. And we have SCEA. So why don't we define SCE? How about the first sentence as something like this?
 
That would make it clear that all of the "SCE"s in the article refer to Sony Computer Entertainment.
Done. --JDC808 ♫ 21:51, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
  This is in the second para of the lead. Without reading the article, I can't tell who the "who is responsible" refers to. Is Ares responsible for Kratos murdering his family? Without reading the article, that confuses. After reading the article, I understand, but many people will read only the lead. The sentence needs more clarity. 
 Kratos is tasked by the goddess Athena with killing Ares, the God of War, who is responsible for Kratos' accidental murder of his family.
 
I'm a bit stumped on this one because I don't know how it's not clear, since "who is responsible" falls right after "Ares, the God of War." Would it help if "the God of War" came before "Ares"? --JDC808 ♫ 21:51, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
Torchiest just did a copy/edit to the sentence. It now reads "The goddess Athena tasks Kratos with killing Ares, the eponymous God of War, who is responsible for Kratos' accidental murder of his family." --JDC808 ♫ 21:55, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
That helps ... it's just confusing because someone made someone else accidentally kill his family ... not intuitive. Anyway, that's better I guess. SandyGeorgia (Talk) 21:59, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
  I'm not going to oppose this time because these video game articles are just too frustrating; I wish an independent, non-gamer would routinely copyedit them, but I don't have time to go through them line-by-line. SandyGeorgia (Talk) 20:00, 22 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Oppose on prose and comprehensiveness issues. The article is obviously and naturally written by editors who are intimately familiar with the game. As someone who has never seen the game, however, I as the reader seeking information about the subject am left with many more questions than answers from the article, in particular with the description of the game's plot and interface. The article could be organized better and expanded further. A smattering of examples follows, this list is not comprehensive and it is my opinion that the article needs more work than can be accomplished within the timeframe of a FAC. Neil916 (Talk) 08:36, 23 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Lead
Consider the lead to be a bird's eye view of the subject matter, such as if I click on a wikilink to this article just to find out what the heck God of War (video game) is. I'll glance at the lead section to get an overview, and click back once I know. Or, I'll get sucked into the article and abandon the first one. Whatever. But the lead section should be very concise and should convey the most relevant information in as short a time as possible. The first paragraph contains information about other games in the series including a prequel in development, before telling the reader anything about the game itself.
 
Okay, switched around. --JDC808 ♫ 23:58, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
The first paragraph presents as a wall of blue text, with terms like "gameplay", "game controller", "special powers" and "puzzles" wikilinked. It is overlinked in my opinion.
Delinked some. They were linked so that a non-gamer would understand what those terms meant, or what they were referring to. --JDC808 ♫ 23:58, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
The word "eponymous" was used twice in the first two paragraphs of the article. I didn't know what it meant, so I had to look it up. The definition I got was "giving one's name to a tribe, place, etc.: Romulus, the eponymous founder of Rome.". I don't understand the use of the word to describe Ares as the eponymous God of War. Perhaps the fancy words could be abandoned in favor of phrases that are easier for the reader to understand (and for the writers to use in the correct context?)
The definition of how it's used is "of, relating to, or being the person or thing for whom or which something is named : of, relating to, or being an eponym."
Ares was responsible for Kratos' accidental murder of his family? What does that mean? Back to the dictionary. Murder is "the unlawful killing, with malice aforethought, of another person." How does one accidentally murder someone?
This is explained in the Plot section. The main character, Kratos, attacked a village and Ares secretly transported his family to its temple. Kratos went on a rampage and blindly killed all in the temple and when the carnage was over, he realized he had killed his family. Ares purposely put them there for that to happen. Kratos did not intend to murder them, that why it says accidental. --JDC808 ♫ 23:58, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Torchiest has replaced "murder" with "killing" (..."who is responsible for Kratos' accidental killing of his family.") --JDC808 ♫ 21:24, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
"As Ares ravages Athens,..." If that fact is important enough to mention in the lead, you should also give a hint of why Ares is ravaging Athens. The only other hint about this in the rest of the article is a brief mention when describing the various battlefields of the game.
Clarified.
"Chronologically, God of War is the third chapter in the series, which focuses on vengeance as its central theme.". This is out of place in the second paragraph of the lead, the rest of the paragraph has nothing to do with the chronology of the series.
Moved.
It was moved, but then replaced with two sentences about the series and the chronology series, and I don't see how they belong in a paragraph where the first three sentences are about gameplay. The information is important, and I don't think it belongs in the first or third paragraph, either, See my comments below under the second read-through. Neil916 (Talk) 09:12, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
They were put together to avoid two small paragraphs. Addressed further in later comments. --JDC808 ♫ 23:11, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
The third paragraph of the lead is actually quite good and paints a picture of why the game is relevant in the gaming community.
 
Before even telling the reader what the game is about, the article launches into a detailed description of the weapons, and treasures that can be found in the game. I think some background is needed before diving into such detail. Probably reorganize so the "synopsis" section is above this one.
This organization is a very common layout for most video game articles (I've only seen maybe one or two that haven't used this) and this is the organization that's been laid out by the WP:VG project. --JDC808 ♫ 23:58, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Torchiest has rearranged the sections. --JDC808 ♫ 21:24, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
I think it reads much better now. Neil916 (Talk) 09:12, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
"The player guides Kratos through different environments composing of a series of missions to achieve specific goals". Clunky reading. What kind of mission doesn't have a goal? Composing of a series of missions?
Reword and added enemies to accommodate a later issue. --JDC808 ♫ 23:58, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
"Kratos' main weapons are the Blades of Chaos: a pair of blades attached to chains wrapped around Kratos' wrists that can be swung around to attack enemies, similar to a kusarigama." I think "weapons" should be singular, since you refer to is as A pair of blades. In any event, it reads poorly.
Do you have a suggestion of how to reword it so that it does not read poorly? --JDC808 ♫ 23:58, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
I know this sentence has been tweaked a couple of times, but it now reads, "Kratos's main weapon is the Blades of Chaos: a pair of blades attached to chains that are wrapped around Kratos's wrists and can be swung around to attack enemies." The "and can be swung around" throws me. How about just breaking it into two, like "Kratos's main weapon is the Blades of Chaos: a pair of blades attached to chains that are wrapped around Kratos's wrists. The blades can be swung around to attack enemies." or something similar? Neil916 (Talk) 11:02, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
Fixed with your suggestion. --JDC808 ♫ 17:25, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
The first paragraph of this article continues describing various weapons without attaching much significance to them. Why would I, as the player, want to throw lightning bolts, or breathe underwater? What's a rage meter and how does it get full? Oh, I'll find out later in the article about the rage meter, but not really if the rage meter has any function aside from that one spell.
Did some work. --JDC808 ♫ 23:58, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Noted. Some cleanup/copyediting still needs to be done. I'll help with that later. Neil916 (Talk) 09:12, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
"Kratos can learn to use up to four magical abilities, such as Zeus' Fury that allows him to throw lightning bolts, giving him a variety of ways to attack and kill enemies." I kind of assumed that throwing lightning bolts was so the player could attack enemies, but why would I want to throw a lighting bolt instead of just whacking the monster with my Blades of Chaos? Do they have better range? Stronger hits? Greater chances of a knockout? Better/gorier graphics and sound effects? Faster attacks? That's what I was looking for. Same with the Blade of Artemis. It's a different weapon, but does it have some advantages in certain situations over the Blades of Chaos? Are both weapons armed at the same time? I'm kind of curious how Kratos is able to wield a sword when he has chains welded to his wrists, but I don't think that matters in the article. Neil916 (Talk) 11:13, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
Added "for better range" with the lightning bolt and put the Artemis blade is separate and gave an example. --JDC808 ♫ 17:25, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
What's magic used for in the game? I see if I find a blue orb, I can replenish it, but why would I want to?
Done. --JDC808 ♫ 23:58, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
"Additionally, the player can find Gorgon Eyes and Phoenix Feathers in plain, neutrally colored chests" as opposed to what color chests? Does the color of a chest show what color orb is in it? If so, describe in more detail.
The orb containing chests. Yes. Done. --JDC808 ♫ 23:58, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
"The Eyes and Feathers incrementally increases the health and magic meters, respectively," do you mean increasing the maximum value of the health and magic values, or replenish them? I think the first, but I can't tell.
The second half of that sentence (unquoted here) answered this, but have clarified. --JDC808 ♫ 23:58, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
"Combat includes a quick time event (QTE) feature, also called context sensitive attacks, that is initiated when the player has weakened a strong foe." What foes? The article to this point forgot to mention who the player is fighing, other than a mention of Ares dying at the end. And a Cyclops.
Fixed as noted above.
"Similar in function to the QTE feature, the game includes a quick time sex mini-game in the form of an encounter with female twins, which has become a regular feature throughout the series." This seems odd to mention in a paragraph that appears to be about combat. Is this sex game a prominent part of the plot of the game? An easter egg?
It starts out describing a feature of the combat, which is the QTE feature. The sex mini-game is played exactly the same way as the QTE feature, except there is no damage caused to the character if you fail. In comparison of being a prominent part of the plot, this would fall more to being an easter egg, but it's not a hidden feature, it's a blatantly obvious feature that has become a regular feature in this series, as stated. --JDC808 ♫ 23:58, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
"The player may unlock bonus costumes, behind-the-scenes videos, and art galleries as rewards." What are bonus costumes and art galleries and why would a character engaged in combat in Ancient Greece want to own an art gallery?
Fixed. --JDC808 ♫ 23:58, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
 
"With the exception of flashbacks, the game's events are set between Chains of Olympus and Ghost of Sparta." What does this mean?
It means exactly what it says. Chains of Olympus and Ghost of Sparta are two other games in the series. The game this article is about is set between them. I'll clarify that it's set between the games. --JDC808 ♫ 23:58, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
The section makes a list of six battle settings, then proceeds to go into further detail about each of them in a different order than it was first introduced. In what order do these various settings appear during gameplay? It is important that three sirens roam the Desert of the Lost Souls? Does the player have to kill them and is that hard to do? Same with Cronos. Friend or foe?
The gameplay order starts in the second paragraph. The first paragraph is saying that there are four main locations and the other two aren't as prominent. Fixed sirens. All Cronos does is crawl with the temple on his back.
First paragraph now also shows gameplay order. --JDC808 ♫ 05:13, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
 
What is a supporting role? They appear in cinematic sequences? They help the player fight? They fight against the player? The article identifies the characters without making it clear what role they play in the game.
Fixed.
 
Many of my questions about context are revealed in this section, more than halfway through the article. I think it should come much earlier in the article.
More nitpicks about wording and prose in this section, but it's not nearly as confusing and disjointed as the earlier sections.
  ... and more. I could go on but I'm out of energy. Overall, I think this article still needs some considerable reorganization, and rewriting, possibly by an editor familiar with gaming, but not with this game in particular. Neil916 (Talk) 08:36, 23 January 2013 (UTC) 
 
I'm not sure what the grounds for opposition on comprehensiveness are, as far as I can see it contains all the available information about the game. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 19:32, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
Please re-read my comments, I pointed out several instances of information that was missing and/or unclear. Neil916 (Talk) 09:12, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
  Second read-through, this revision 
 
"Highly regarded for its gameplay, God of War focuses on combo-based combat and quick time events that require the successful completion of game controller actions in timed sequences." Lose the "Highly regarded for its gameplay" part, since the article adequately addressed that point in the third paragraph of the lead and it reads awkwardly. When the article says that the quick time events that require the successful completion game controller actions, I think it means that a successful completion of a particular QTE requires a successful execution of a timed sequence, but it might also mean that certain QTE sequences are required to be completed successfully in order to complete the game. That should be clearer to the reader.
Removed "Highly regarded for its gameplay." I believe I've cleared up the QTE part. --JDC808 ♫ 23:11, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
"God of War is the first installment in the series of the same name, for which it is the third chronologically, and includes four sequels and a prequel as of 2012. A second prequel is in development." I still have some problems with these two sentences. First, I think they're far off topic in a paragraph where the other three sentences discuss elements of the game's gameplay. Second, I don't quite get the wording. It is the first installment, but the third chronologically, there are four sequels and a prequel as of 2012. Until the second prequel that is in development is actually released, I think that makes this the second cronologically. The information is important enough to include in the lead, but it's misplaced and confusingly worded as it is. I'd consider a fourth paragraph in the lead about the game's placement in the series.
Although I disagree with some points on confusion, I've expanded on the gameplay, made it a separate paragraph, and I expanded the series part as its own paragraph. --JDC808 ♫ 23:11, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 
"Three sirens roam the desert; their defeat guides warriors through the desert so that they may summon the Titan Cronos and access Pandora's Temple chained to his back." It explains better than before, but is worded badly and wasn't clear enough for me to fix it myself. Is the article trying to say that the defeat of the sirens doesn't kill them, but causes them to guide the player through the desert in order to summon Cronos?
Further clarified. --JDC808 ♫ 23:11, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
It needs a little more work. It now reads, "killing them releases their soul, which guides warriors through the desert". Do three sirens have one soul? Is it the soul/ghost of the last siren who acts as a guide across the desert? Neil916 (Talk) 10:54, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
Added s to soul. --JDC808 ♫ 17:25, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
I've made other copyedits to this section directly to the article itself.
Are the locations listed in the order that the player will encounter each location?
I answered this above with your first comment regarding the locations, but yes, they are in order that player's will encounter them. --JDC808 ♫ 23:11, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
Sorry, I didn't notice that before. Neil916 (Talk) 10:54, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
 
Each of the gods and goddesses have their titles capitalized. For example, Athena is listed as the "Goddess of Wisdom", but the Athena article doesn't use that capitalization. I think that each of their titles should be preceeded by "the" as is done with Ares. Athena should be "Athena, the goddess of wisdom", not "Athena, Goddess of Wisdom". I don't think either way is technically correct, it just reads smoother.
It's capitalized because it's their title. I don't fully get why the main articles for the gods don't do it that way, which I find silly. I have gone through and added "the" to each. --JDC808 ♫ 23:11, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
I still think that's wrong, perhaps someone else can voice an opinion. Neil916 (Talk) 10:54, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
"...the body burner (Christopher Corey Smith), who allows Kratos to enter Pandora's Temple..." The article has a list of characters with the names of the characters and the name of the voice actor, then all of a sudden it interjects details about the last two characters.
Because they weren't mentioned in the Plot. Have removed. --JDC808 ♫ 23:11, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 
"The player guides Kratos through various environments while fighting enemies, such as Gorgons, who come mostly from Greek mythology" According to the Gorgon article, the Gorgons are totally from Greek mythology, I don't understand the "mostly" part.
Mostly as in, not all of the enemies come from Greek mythology. --JDC808 ♫ 23:11, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
The article mentions that the game features platforming elements both in the lead and the gameplay section, but other than a mention that there are platforming elements, it doesn't tell me what they are or what their significance is.
Expanded on platforming. --JDC808 ♫ 23:11, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
The article mentions that there are puzzles. Provide at least one typical example of a puzzle.
Done. --JDC808 ♫ 23:11, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
I'm glad you did, because I had visualized something completely different. Neil916 (Talk) 10:54, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
  ...and more. I've stopped reviewing while in the Gameplay section, I'm out of time this evening, I'll revisit in the next few days. Neil916 (Talk) 09:12, 28 January 2013 (UTC) 
 
"Game Director David Jaffe confirmed the game would be a cinematic presentation, and said, "we are doing extensive focus tests, and using data compiled from E3, to find and fix the problem areas" of the cameras." I don't get this. What problems were there with the cameras? Were complaints received from trials at E3? Clarify what he's talking about because up to this point there was nothing mentioned about camera/POV problems.
I'll have to recheck the source. I rechecked the source and put all the information that the source has in regards to the cameras. --JDC808 ♫ 17:25, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
The first two sentences of the second paragraph appear to have little to do with the last four paragraphs of that same paragraph. Hard returns are cheap, consider splitting into their own paragraphs, perhaps with an expansion of what the camera problems were.
Will work on. Also, generally I've noticed with VG articles, if there's not enough information on a particular subject, paragraphs are combined in a way like this. --JDC808 ♫ 17:25, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
I split into separate paragraphs. --JDC808 ♫ 20:45, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
"The team designed two systems of combat: a "macro" system, which gives players the choice between normal combat, magical attacks, and/or using mini games to kill a foe" Whoa, some major information appears to be left out of the gameplay section here. Using minigames to kill a foe? What is that about?
The QTE feature. Clarified. --JDC808 ♫ 17:25, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
"Jaffe said the 1981 film Raiders of the Lost Ark inspired the development of God of War" This contradicts the statement that the game was inspired by Clash of the Titans. He didn't have to be inspired by only one or the other, but it left me scratching my head when I read it because I'd just read that he was inspired by Clash of the Titans.
It had said "Raiders also inspired", but someone removed it. "Also" added back. --JDC808 ♫ 17:25, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
"but did not want to put the player in the role of an adventurer, referencing The Legend of Zelda." What does that mean?
Zelda puts players in the role of an adventurer, Jaffe did not want to do that with this game. --JDC808 ♫ 17:25, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
"but the game "is not innovative or unique, and that's intentional." That quote appears to directly contradict his quote in the third paragraph, "Jaffe said the game would be unique because each puzzle is different".
Yeah, Jaffe is a weird guy. But it does elaborate after that. --JDC808 ♫ 17:25, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
"Our system was so shallow that it forced the team to constantly create new content to trapeze the player from one area of interest to the next ... I understand modular game design, and the value of that, but I was feeling that if we didn't step outside those boundaries, at least for me, I was going to get bored." This makes little sense to me what he's saying. I understand it's a direct quote, but it's so confusing that it would probably be better for the article to paraphrase what he was trying to say in a much more coherent manner rather than a direct quote.
Will work on. I direct quoted because I didn't think I could paraphrase it well, and I felt this had more meaning. --JDC808 ♫ 17:25, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
Worked on. --JDC808 ♫ 20:45, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
 
"The game was released on March 22[26] in North America," move citation to after the comma
Will fix. Fixed --JDC808 ♫ 17:25, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
"By the end of July, the game was the sixth-best-selling game of 2005" At that point? Or by the end of July the game had already sold enough to cement its place by the end of the year as the sixth-best-selling game of 2005? No, that doesn't make sense. How did it stand at the end of 2005?
Clarified. I've tried finding sources of its sales at that time. This was the only source I could find. --JDC808 ♫ 17:25, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
The figure of 4.6 million copies being sold is mentioned in the first paragraph. Does that figure include the 2.4 million copies of the collection, or is it 4.6 million stand-alone copies in addition to 2.4 million copies as part of a collection?
4.6 million is God of War only. I thought it was clear since the first paragraph doesn't mention the collection at all. The collection is a separate release so its sales aren't going to be included in that. That's why the second paragraph says the collection sold 2.4 million. --JDC808 ♫ 17:25, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
  ...done for now. Neil916 (Talk) 11:53, 1 February 2013 (UTC) 
 [edit] Source spot-check by FutureTrillionaire 
 Book referencing 
 There appears to be multiple citations from the "God of War (Instruction manual)" and the book by Stover and Vardeman. The pattern used in the article appears to be that the first citation is stated in the form "SCE Santa Monica Studio, ed. (2005). God of War (Instruction manual). Sony Computer Entertainment. pp. 16-17." while the following are in the form " SCE Santa Monica Studio, ed. (2005), pp. 18–19". I'm not sure if this is the proper way to cite books. I think short citations should be used here.--Futuretrillionaire (talk) 00:07, 28 January 2013 (UTC) 
 
Hm. I will look into this. How it's currently being done is the way I had learned (and was acceptable in my last FAC that was promoted). You may be correct. --JDC808 ♫ 03:03, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 
On this point, Futuretrillionaire, are you saying all the references, including the first one, should be short, with a separate full citation that is not individually referenced, but is pointed to by all the short ones? Check the way the manual is referenced in God of War: Chains of Olympus, which is the same as here, versus Starflight, which I think has what you want? —Torchiest talkedits 05:18, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
I think the Starflight model is better. I'd like to see in addition to the "references" section a "bibliography" section, where we put the full citation of books without the page numbers. The references section would be where the short citations for the books will be. Again, I'm not sure if the current book citation format is wrong, it just doesn't look good in my opinion.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 17:00, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
Will work on. --JDC808 ♫ 23:11, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
  ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘Fixed. --JDC808 ♫ 21:18, 30 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Citations 
 The characters section is supported by 2 sources, both placed at the end of the paragraph. all of the voice actors mentioned in the section are listed in the allgame source except Paul Eiding. Am I correct so assume that he is listed in the manual source? Also the entire plot section lacks citation. At the very least, a citation should be added at the end of each paragraph, even if all the citations come from one source.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 23:56, 29 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Paul Eiding is listed at allgame, they typoed his name as Oaul Eiding, same with Carole Ruggier, should be "ier" not "ler". And yes, he is listed in the manual. As to Plot, it's generally accepted that they're uncited, at least for video game articles (maybe film too). I can try to locate a source. --JDC808 ♫ 00:11, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
Interesting, I think you're right. I checked several other featured VG articles, and some of them do not have citations, and some of the ones that do use primary sources (the game itself). Considering this, I suppose citing sources in that section is not necessary.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 00:29, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
Yeah. I think the main reason is that unless you cite the game itself, you'd have to use a strategy and unless you own it, you'd have to find one online that can't be edited freely. I think Mahalo is one of the few that can only be edited by site administrators. --JDC808 ♫ 00:38, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
Actually, according to Wikipedia:WikiProject Video games/Sources#Video games, when citing the VG itself, we need to "provide transcripts wherever possible, and enable readers to check the facts themselves by noting which area, level or episode is cited." This seems to imply that we need to add citations for parts relying on primary sources. Also, I think this is helpful, reliable source for the plot summary:[20].(Note: the section links don't appear to be working, but you still access pages with the arrows and manipulating the url)--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 00:49, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
  ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘Added. --JDC808 ♫ 21:20, 30 January 2013 (UTC) 
 In the "Release" section, the "June 21 in Europe" is not mentioned in the source. Also, isn't the UK in Europe. This should be clarified, especially for non-gamers. Also, in the "Development" section, shouldn't "macro system" and "micro system" have quotation marks around them? They are terms invented by the developers.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 
 Yes, the UK is in Europe, but in the gaming world (at least), it sometimes has a different release from the rest of Europe. I thought we had a source for Europe's release. Removed until then. You may be right on the terms. --JDC808 ♫ 22:07, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
  There seems to be more problems in the "Release section". The date "November 17, 2009" is not mentioned in the source. Also, there's no source for "It was released in Japan on March 18, 2010". The citation placed later in the sentence only refers to Australia.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 21:11, 1 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Fixed. --JDC808 ♫ 22:11, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
  One minor issue I'd like to add is that in the awards section, the source calls the award "Best Action Game", not "Action Game of the Year". --FutureTrillionaire (talk) 22:43, 1 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Fixed. --JDC808 ♫ 22:51, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
  The soundtrack section contains 2 sources, neither of which mentions "Winnie Waldron" nor "Marcello De Francisci". The sources also don't mention "Sony Computer Entertainment".--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 22:58, 1 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Fixed. --JDC808 ♫ 23:02, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
  Okay, one last thing. In the film section, I couldn't find the quote "huge-name director" in any of the web sources cited in that paragraph. That leaves only the documentary source. If the quote did come from the doc source, then a citation of the doc should be placed at the end of that sentence containing the quote. If not, either that part needs to be removed, or a source needs to be found for it.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 01:09, 2 February 2013 (UTC) 
 I'm thinking that the "huge-name director" came from a source that was broken by the time I started working on the page. I've removed the information and put another source. --JDC808 ♫ 04:18, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
 Support nomination - I've done an extensive source spot-check on the web sources used in the article, and all the issues I found have been resolved. I believe this article is ready to become an FA.--FutureTrillionaire (talk) 04:25, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
 
Thanks! --JDC808 ♫ 04:37, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Leaning to oppose: Prose needs some more work, but you're getting there. I can't quibble on too much since I do not scrutinize video game articles too often (I just read them for fun and curiosity). From the lead: 
 You need commas after month-day-year dates, such as in here: "The game was first released on March 22, 2005 for the PlayStation 2 (PS2) console."
 
Fixed. Seems odd to put that slight pause with that example sentence, but if it's the correct way then okay. --JDC808 ♫ 04:50, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
Yep, it's correct styling. It's used for [city], [country/state] phrases too. But not date-month-year dates. Thanks for the fix. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 12:29, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
This is the first time I'd seen this rule as well, but WP:DATE states, "When a date in mdy format appears in the middle of text, include a comma after the year (The weather on September 11, 2001, was clear and warm)." What an odd rule. Neil916 (Talk) 10:36, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
 "It is loosely based on Greek mythology, and is set in Ancient Greece with vengeance as its central theme." – that's more of a motif than a theme.
 
Okay, I think the developers had said it was the theme at some point, but changed theme to motif. --JDC808 ♫ 04:50, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 "The player controls the protagonist Kratos, a Spartan warrior in the service of the Olympian Gods." – "in the service of" → "who serves"?
 
Changed. --JDC808 ♫ 04:50, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 "The goddess Athena tasks Kratos with killing Ares, the God of War for which the game is named and who is responsible for Kratos' accidental killing of his family." – why is "for which the game is named" necessary? It's obvious (and should be "after whom").
 
There was a shorter phrase being used, but it had caused confusion so it was replaced with that, which I just removed it. --JDC808 ♫ 04:50, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
Torchiest has left a response below, expanding on this. --JDC808 ♫ 05:08, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 Fused participle: "... God of War focuses on combo-based combat and quick time events requiring the successful completion of timed sequences of game controller actions." – ambiguous what the subject of "requiring" is: God of War or quick time events. If the latter, write "quick time events that require". Same number of syllables, just more grammatically correct. Furthermore, the repetition of "of" is a little unpleasant.
 
Fixed. --JDC808 ♫ 04:50, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 Avoid additive adverb transitions such as "additionally" that do not add anything (that's four "ad" sounds!).
 
Fixed. --JDC808 ♫ 04:50, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 "Additionally, the player can use magical attacks and special powers for alternative combat options." – Should be "as alternative combat options", not "for".
 
Fixed. --JDC808 ♫ 04:50, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 Couldn't saying either "magical attacks" or "special powers" be enough? Are magical attacks not special powers?
 
Not exactly, there's four magical attacks and a special power (which inreases attack power and makes the character invincible for a short period). Reworded. --JDC808 ♫ 04:50, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 Redundancies, like "an array of" here: "Players also solve an array of puzzles and the game features platforming elements." Also avoid vague adjectives of quanity, such as "multiple": "Multiple reviewers have said God of War is one of the best action-adventure games on the PlayStation 2." (Multiple is anything from 2 to, well, a lot.)
 
I'm not sure what you mean by the redundancy for "an array of". I'm not sure what to replace "multiple" with. --JDC808 ♫ 04:50, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
Remove "an array of" and "multiple". The meaning is still the same. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 12:29, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
Removed. --JDC808 ♫ 23:11, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 The use of "over a dozen" does not sound very encyclopedic here: "...and it has won over a dozen "Game of the Year" awards." Just go with a simple "several".
 
Changed. --JDC808 ♫ 04:50, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 Unclear: "In addition to its gameplay, God of War has been highly regarded for its graphics, sound, production, presentation, and story." – what do you mean by regarded for its production? Can something be praised for its development stage? In popular music, the word refers to the beat and instrumentation, but not sure about video games. And I'm wondering about the usefulness of this sentence; doesn't that cover pretty much every aspect of a video game? So it was widely regarded for all aspects?
 
One of the reviewers made a list of everything he thought was excellent and production was on that list. Removed production. To answer the last question, pretty much. --JDC808 ♫ 04:50, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 For a quick sample of what's below the lead: "With the exception of flashbacks, the game's events are set between the games, Chains of Olympus and Ghost of Sparta." – second comma just chops the sentence up; there's no pause there, so remove.
 
Removed. --JDC808 ♫ 04:50, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
  Stopped there. Consider another once-over, as there seems to be some odd sentences here and there that need rephrasing. But in general, not bad at all. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 04:00, 28 January 2013 (UTC) 
 
I have to reply to this item: '"The goddess Athena tasks Kratos with killing Ares, the God of War for which the game is named and who is responsible for Kratos' accidental killing of his family." – why is "for which the game is named" necessary? It's obvious (and should be "after whom").'
That sentence has been changed a few times now. The version before the current one said, "The goddess Athena tasks Kratos with killing Ares, the eponymous God of War, who is responsible for Kratos' accidental killing of his family." An editor did not like the word eponymous, finding it too obscure, so the longer phrase was added to explicate the definition. Before that, the sentence said, "Kratos is tasked by the goddess Athena with killing Ares, the God of War, who is responsible for Kratos' accidental murder of his family." An editor did not like the sentence structure, finding the apposition confused how many people were being referred to in the sentence. That was corrected with an active voice and the addition of eponymous to make it clear that "Ares" and "the God of War" are the same person. So I would submit that things that some readers find obvious need more explanation for other editors. I'm certain many readers would not recognize the name Ares. —Torchiest talkedits 05:00, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
Thank you. I think with the current wording it is clear who Ares is, but I guess we can use dashes or parentheses to make it even clearer. Yes, I think eponymous is a bit odd, but it is also clear that God of War is named after the God of War without having to mention that. I can see why the sentence would cause so much concern, but it seems good now (but like I said, there're always dashes or parentheses if you want). —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ]All points have been addresses so far. --JDC808 ♫ 23:11, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
  I'm still not quite confident I can withdraw my oppose. 
 For example, this is six locations: "There are five locations explored in the game: the Aegean Sea, the ancient city of Athens, the Desert of Lost Souls, the Temple of Pandora, the Underworld, and a brief scene on Mount Olympus."
 
It had said five main locations, then a brief scene in the last. Neil916, copyedited and changed it to this. Fixed. --JDC808 ♫ 21:06, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 This could be tightened: "The Aegean Sea setting includes a mass of shipwrecked vessels; undead soldiers, harpies, and the Hydra are attacking what remains of the [remaining] living soldiers."
 
Fixed. --JDC808 ♫ 21:06, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 Repetition of "sirens": " Three sirens roam the desert; killing the sirens releases their soul, which guides warriors through the desert so that they may summon the Titan Cronos and gain access to Pandora's Temple." – don't see why one can't be converted to "them".
 
Done. --JDC808 ♫ 21:06, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 This seems like plot, not setting: "Zeus chained the temple to Cronos' back as punishment for his role in the Great War."
 
Yeah, it just seemed unnecessary to put in the Plot and better served here. If you think it would be better served in the Plot, I will move it accordingly. --JDC808 ♫ 21:06, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 Perhaps the subsection name could renamed "Background", because it isn't just setting. There're some events that happen before the story that don't fall under setting (time/place/situation).
 
I'm not entirely sure what you're referring to. Are you saying rename "Setting" to "Background"? There are events that happen before the story, but they are all scene through cutscenes. Everything in "Setting" is what the player actually explores during gameplay. --JDC808 ♫ 21:06, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
OK. I was confused because of the Zeus chaining detail, which seemed out of place. It would fit better into the plot section. By setting, we're only talking about the backdrop and environment. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 23:02, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Okay, moved Zeus part to Plot. --JDC808 ♫ 23:17, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 Redundancies remain: "The massive temple, constructed by the architect Pathos Verdes III, is full of deadly traps and a variety of enemies"; "Other characters that appear include a host of Greek gods"
 
Variety was to imply that there are lots of different enemies, but have fixed both. --JDC808 ♫ 21:06, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
  The presence of these concerns tell me that there is a little bit of work needed to be done throughout before this can be promoted to FA status. I'm in the midst of doing a thorough peer review that I've been committed to for about a month now and don't have time to go through this entire article. When some more copy editing has been done in the article, let me know and I'll be glad to revisit. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 20:33, 29 January 2013 (UTC) 
 I see some improvements have been made. They do not seem enough unfortunately. Understanding that the article has already gone through independent copy editing, I'll try to tweak the prose around a bit myself, and you can see if my edits appear OK. There are quite a few glitches (pun not intended) dispersed, and they need to be fixed before the prose can be considered "brilliant". Best, —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 23:02, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Okay, thanks. --JDC808 ♫ 23:17, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 I've messed around a bit with the lead and have tried to remove redundancies and improve sentence structure. The lead does need to be trimmed. The article is close, but not quite 30 KB in prose length. So three paragraphs should only be necessary, per WP:LEAD. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 23:19, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 
It was three paragraphs, but Neil916 had some issues with what-was-where which made me break it into four paragraphs. The second and third paragraphs didn't contain as much information and were together as one paragraph, before it was split. --JDC808 ♫ 23:23, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Valid point! I'm fine with this. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 00:57, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 "The Eyes and Feathers incrementally increases the length of the health and magic meters, respectively, and the player must find a total of eighteen Eyes or Feathers to maximize the length of each meter, thus maximizing the player's power."—is "The Eyes and Featers" one item? I ask this because you say "increases". To someone not familiar with the topic, this comes off as awkward grammar. It should be clarified that they are one item somehow, if they are, that is. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 22:22, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 
They are two items. The Eyes increase the health meter, Feather the magic. "Respectively" was put there to try and indicate that. --JDC808 ♫ 23:07, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
"Increases" is now "increase". --JDC808 ♫ 23:16, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
That sentence is a bit wordy. I know it's been worked over a few times, but maybe it could just say: "The Eyes and Feathers increase the size of the health and magic meters, respectively; finding eighteen of an item maximizes a meter and thus, the player's power." —Torchiest talkedits 23:17, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
Seems reasonable to me. Maybe just swap "size" with "length." --JDC808 ♫ 23:20, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
I'm OK with this suggestion. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 12:09, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
Done. --JDC808 ♫ 17:58, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
 In the development section, we have "the developer" and "The developers", which has left me confused.
 
Fixed. --JDC808 ♫ 23:07, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 The game was released on March 22[26] in North America, July 8 in the United Kingdom, and November 17 in Japan."—that's odd citation placement. Is it because the IGN link does not say anything about North America?
 
The first IGN link (ref 26) only has March 22, the rest are in the other IGN link (ref 27). --JDC808 ♫ 23:07, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 "At the 2006 Interactive Achievement Awards, the game won several awards, including 'Overall Game of the Year', 'Console Game of the Year', 'Outstanding Achievement for Animation', 'Outstanding Achievement for Original Music Composition', 'Outstanding Achievement for Sound Design', 'Outstanding Character Performance for a Male' (TC Carson as Kratos), and 'Action/Adventure Game of the Year'."—"including" implies that these are just some of the many awards it won at the show, but considering the length of list, that doesn't seem to be true. Is this list exhaustive? If so, get to the point (i.e. "...the game won 'Overall Game of the Year'..."). —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 23:02, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Okay. Will trim. Trimmed. --JDC808 ♫ 23:07, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 "They said they were hired to rework Self's screenplay, but since it was written before Clash of the Titans (2010), Wrath of the Titans, 300, and Immortals, which they said had borrowed ideas from the God of War stories, they considered Self's script outdated, and they want to differentiate God of War from other films of the same genre. Dunstan said the first step is to humanize Kratos."—"They...they...they...they" seems repetitive. Also, towards the end, there's some awkward tense; it may be correct, but it doesn't sound nice.
 
Okay, two of the "they"s have been removed. Can you elaborate on the tense issue? --JDC808 ♫ 03:56, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
The sudden change of tense starting from "they want to differentiate" is awkward. "They wanted" sounds better, IMO. And for the last one, future tense sounds more suitable. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 12:09, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
Changed to 'wanted". As per "the last one", keep the rest as is? --JDC808 ♫ 17:58, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
Yes. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 18:04, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
Okay. --JDC808 ♫ 18:08, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
 "To date, the film is without a director and has a budget of $150 million."—what currency? US? —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 01:56, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
 
US. Fixed. --JDC808 ♫ 03:56, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
  I have struck through my oppose and would like to read through the article once more before supporting. Thanks, —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 18:24, 2 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Second look: 
 "God of War is a third person action-adventure video game published by Sony Computer Entertainment (SCE) and developed by SCE Santa Monica Studio."—I'd preferably write by whom it was developed before by whom it was published. Chronologically makes more sense and the developer is usually more important.
 
I agree. The reason it's written that way is because SandyGeorgia had suggested it because of the "SCE" acronym. I've switched it back and just removed "SCE" from in front of Santa Monica Studio. --JDC808 ♫ 22:07, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
 "The game features quick time events that require the player to complete various game controller actions in a timed sequence to defeat stronger enemies and boss fights."—"to defeat ... boss fights"? Please correct.
 
Fixed. --JDC808 ♫ 22:07, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
 "Players also solve puzzles and the game features platforming elements."—awkward. Suggest something like "The game also features puzzles and platforming elements."
 
Done. --JDC808 ♫ 22:07, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
 "To date, the series includes four sequels, God of War II (2007), God of War: Betrayal (2007), God of War III (2010), and God of War: Ghost of Sparta (2010), and a prequel, God of War: Chains of Olympus (2008)."—I don't think the list of sequels is necessary.
 
Okay. --JDC808 ♫ 22:07, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
Since removing the list of sequels shrunk the paragraph and made it a bit small IMO for the lead, I've incorporated the "first installment" and "second chronologically" into the first paragraph. --JDC808 ♫ 22:46, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
 "A second prequel is in development, God of War: Ascension, which will be a prequel to the entire series, and will be released in March 2013."—tighten to "God of War: Ascension will be released as a prequel to the entire series in March 2013."
 
Done. --JDC808 ♫ 22:07, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
As per above, this is no longer there. --JDC808 ♫ 22:49, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
 "As of June 2012, the game had sold more than 4.6 million copies worldwide."—"has sold" probably.
 
Someone had switched it to "had". Changed to has. --JDC808 ♫ 22:07, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
June 2012 was in the past so we use the past tense. --John (talk) 06:32, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
 "With the exception of flashbacks, the game's events are set between the games Chains of Olympus and Ghost of Sparta."—remove "the game's". Less repetitive.
 
Done. --JDC808 ♫ 22:07, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
More to come once these have been resolved. I add any FACs I review to my watchlist, BTW. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 21:00, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
 "While a group of harpies take the Box to Ares, Kratos falls into the Underworld."—subject–verb agreement error?
 
Um, not sure. I thought it was correct? --JDC808 ♫ 21:35, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
Maybe just remove "a group of"? —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 21:44, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
Done. --JDC808 ♫ 21:47, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
Thank you. I've seen "the group" used with plural and singular conjugations, but I support the tweak to be safe. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 21:54, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
Okay, and you're welcome. --JDC808 ♫ 22:01, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
 Just a suggestion, but enlarging the screenshot in the Gameplay section would be good, IMO. Probably with he "upright=1.x" option. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 21:20, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
 
Okay, I'll see what I can do. --JDC808 ♫ 21:35, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
Enlarged some. What do you think? --JDC808 ♫ 22:07, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
The size is right. I've done it a bit differently per WP:IMGSIZE, see what you think. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 23:09, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
Looks good. --JDC808 ♫ 23:19, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
 "... and art galleries from the game's development as rewards."—unclear.
 
Did some rewording, but wasn't exactly sure what was unclear. --JDC808 ♫ 00:20, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
 "Puzzles were implemented, including self-contained ones that span one to three rooms of the game, and global puzzles that spread across four or five areas."—unclear what is meant by "span".
 
Couldn't think of another word because I thought "span" was clear. I put "incorporate". I don't know if that's clearer. --JDC808 ♫ 00:20, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
 "Jaffe said the game would be unique because each puzzle is different, and that while each puzzle in the Prince of Persia series was a slight variation of the last, 'each puzzle in God of War is its own beast.'"—what is the relevance to Prince of Persia? —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 23:26, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
 
A comparison essentially. --JDC808 ♫ 00:20, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
It's too out-of-place. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 11:30, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
Before I do any alterations, would it help if I removed ""the game would be unique because each puzzle is different, and"? It would make the sentence, "Jaffe said that while each puzzle in the Prince of Persia series is a slight variation of the last, "each puzzle in God of War is its own beast."" Could even remove the quoted bit and just say they're different. --JDC808 ♫ 16:43, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
Removing the redundancy would certainly improve the sentence, and you can keep the quote. But there's still the problem of the reference to Prince of Persia coming out of nowhere. Maybe, try to put the series into context. For example, was Prince of Persia a popular series at the time? Why would the interviewer even raise the topic of PoP? Perhaps that can give you ideas. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 17:38, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
Okay. Did some work. --JDC808 ♫ 18:30, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
 This has repetition of "game", and there's a tense inconsistency here—"By the end of July, the game was the sixth-best-selling game of 2005 up to that point,[29] and by June 2012, it had sold more than 4.6 million copies worldwide."
 
Removed first "game". Wasn't sure where the tense issue was. --JDC808 ♫ 05:47, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
The first clause has simple past, but the second has past perfect, even though both have "by [month]". Maybe change the latter to "as of June 2012". —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 11:49, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
Changed to "as of June 2012" --JDC808 ♫ 16:57, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 Prose in the Release section is a bit repetitive; there's too much of "was released".
 
Swapped a couple for different words/phrases. --JDC808 ♫ 05:47, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 "The God of War Collection was released as a digital download on the PlayStation Store on November 2, 2010; it was the first product containing PlayStation 2 software available via download."—you could remove the semicolon and just say "...2010, as the first product...".
 
Done, but instead of "2010, as the first", made it "2010, and was the first" --JDC808 ♫ 05:47, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 "The game has been highly regarded for its gameplay, graphics, sound, production, presentation, and story."—that's pretty much everything. Saying "in all aspects" would raise WP:OR and WP:POV concerns, so just removing this sentence is the way to go.
 
Okay, that list was from a review who said all of those were great, and other reviews said multiple areas in that list were great. --JDC808 ♫ 05:47, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 In the first paragraph of "Critical reception", I counted eight instances of "game", "gameplay" or "GameRankings". This is a bit excessive for a paragraph this small.
 
Now there's 4 with 2 being direct quoted. A 3rd is also in a quote but not direct quoted. Can't change GameRankings. --JDC808 ♫ 05:47, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 This is ungainly as well—"Raymond Padilla of GameSpy said the gameplay is excellent and that the game has".
 
Can't help the publisher titles. Removed the third instance of "game". --JDC808 ♫ 05:47, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 Also, using words such as "excellent" and "great" without quotation marks raises the question of tone.
 
I believe I had originally quoted them, but a copy-editor removed the quotes since it was one word. Put quotes. --JDC808 ♫ 05:47, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
Most likely in fear of scare quotes. This I think is a acceptable exception. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 11:49, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 "Lane said the game's story is..."—here's a nice opportunity to remove "the game".
 
In addition to that, I've went through and removed "game", where I felt it wasn't needed. --JDC808 ♫ 05:47, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 "Sell complimented the graphics, stating that they are "quite possibly the best on the PS2" and rival games on the Xbox."—wordy. "Sell complimented [stated that] the graphics, stating that they are "quite possibly the best on the PS2" and rival games on the Xbox."
 
Done. --JDC808 ♫ 05:47, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
More to come. I don't want to think that I withdrew my "leaning to oppose" prematurely but there are issues here that worry me about the prose quality, such as repetition, tone and redundancy. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 02:09, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
I'm surprised copy-editors didn't see at least some of these issues. --JDC808 ♫ 05:47, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 "In an interview for Play (UK) magazine..."—the parenthetical notation here is awkward. Perhaps somethinglike "In an interview for the British Play magazine...". Or just remove this phrase altogether.
 
Removed parenthetical part. --JDC808 ♫ 04:16, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
 "He said giving the readers a solid plot foundation was necessary and the novel required extra material so it did not simply follow the action of the game."—awkward. Add a "that" after "so".
 
Added. --JDC808 ♫ 04:16, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
 "Artemis is convinced for the fact that Ares' minions are destroying the wilderness and its wildlife."—this is just confusing. What is trying to be said?
 
I believe I cleared this up. --JDC808 ♫ 04:16, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
 
I believe I may have fixed this. --JDC808 ♫ 04:16, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
 Regretful note: I'm not sure what to say. This is my third pass through the article, and it still does not have the brilliant and professional prose it should. It's not far, but the language still does not flow well. There's a bit of clumsy and ungainly wording, some odd flow, and some grammatical inconsistencies. The prose also does not seem naturally written to me. These are altogether making me reluctant to support this nomination. Yes, prose reviewing can a subjective process, but it's hard to approve of a FAC you can't read without finding odd bumps along the way. My final piece of advice is for you to try to find a copy editor who is unfamiliar with the article and its topic, and kindly get them to run an eye over the prose. But with that said, it has been a pleasure reviewing this article. I've learned a lot about this fine game's history (haven't played it a lot, though) and appreciate your cooperation JDC808. I'm not sure how this FAC will turn out (you have plenty of support it seems, but a couple of opposes) but wish you good luck for the best. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 20:54, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 
A bit disappointing, but thanks for all of the comments to help improve the article. The tricky part is actually finding said copy-editor. --JDC808 ♫ 04:16, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
A copy-editor unfamiliar with this article and topic just finished going through the article and fixed what he saw, and said it looked excellent. I believe another copy-editor who is also unfamiliar with this is going to have a look as well. --JDC808 ♫ 23:40, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
Will surely take a look once the second copy editor has reviewed the article. Thanks, —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 23:56, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Oppose on prose based on a preliminary sample. --John (talk) 10:17, 26 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Any suggestions to help improve the prose? I'm assuming you're referring to Neil916's comments. Work has been done to improve the prose he had issues with (also waiting on responses from him here, although he did post on my Talk saying it has improved). I'm assuming here, but did you actually read the article or just read what Neil916 said? If it was the latter, please read the article, improvements have been made. Citing examples would be more helpful too. --JDC808 ♫ 19:14, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
I wouldn't oppose without having read, as I said just above, a preliminary sample of the article. I will provide a longer and more detailed rationale when I have time. --John (talk) 19:20, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
Okay, sorry for assuming, it just sounded that way. For future reference, just saying "based on a preliminary sample" is not helpful as we don't know what that preliminary sample is. --JDC808 ♫ 19:32, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 Setting
"...which guides warriors through the desert so that they may summon the Titan Cronos and gain access to Pandora's Temple chained to his back." Is the temple chained to Cronos's back? Or are the warriors to be chained there? What's going on here? Rewrite to avoid ambiguity.
 
Not sure how you got confused with that and not sure how someone would assume warriors are to be chained there. Clarified. --JDC808 ♫ 21:26, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 
"cerberi"? It's a Greek word, not a Latin one, so I am unsure why this would be the plural. I would prefer "cerberuses" or "three-headed dogs"
 
Cerberuses sounds wrong, but okay. --JDC808 ♫ 21:26, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
Cerebrus is a proper noun; it is the given name of an individual creature/character in Greek mythology. I think Cerebruses is like saying there are multiple Athenas in the room. I suggest that three-headed dogs would be better. Neil916 (Talk) 10:24, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
True, but as the developers said, they gave themselves lots of freedom to modify the myths, and as such, cerberus is the name they used for the three-headed dogs (similarly, there is only one Minotaur in the mythology, but there are lots in this game). --JDC808 ♫ 20:59, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
 Characters
"a host of Greek gods"; why "a host"?
 
As per the first definition here. --JDC808 ♫ 21:26, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 Plot
"...Kratos called to the God of War..." Prayed to? Called on? his doesn't look right to me.
 
Changed to "called on". --JDC808 ♫ 21:26, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 
"...transported Kratos' wife and child...", "...Kratos battles his way to Athens' oracle...", "...for Cronos' role...", "Despite Ares' best efforts..." What's happening with these possessives? Is this hypercorrection? It looks fussy and odd to me. --John (talk) 19:33, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
On the possessives, can you clarify your concern? Those should all be correct usages. It's just an unfortunate coincidence that so many characters have names ending in S. —Torchiest talkedits 19:43, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
"Athens'" definitely looks wrong; see for example this style guide. For me they should all take 's apart from Ares. In a way it doesn't make all that much difference, but to me having so many (what look like) hypercorrections in a short passage looks awful. --John (talk) 20:10, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 
All with the exception of Ares are now 's. --JDC808 ♫ 21:26, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
The possessives issue also threw me the first time I saw it; it's not the way I learned to write possessives. But the MOS rule #2 under "For the possessive of singular nouns ending with just one s", an allowable use is "Add just an apostrophe", as long as it is consistent throughout the article, so I didn't bring it up. With JDC808's recent edit, it's not consistent any more, so I'd cast my vote to go back to the way it was or propose a change to the MOS. Neil916 (Talk) 10:19, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
Now I'm confused on what to do. --JDC808 ♫ 20:59, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
Changing the MoS won't change how ugly this looks. How do the sources treat this issue? --John (talk) 06:34, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
I know the sources use Kratos', not Kratos's. I'd have to recheck on the others. --JDC808 ♫ 17:26, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
Did some checking, couldn't find the others in the sources (and if they were, they were singular form), so I checked the Wikipedia pages and Cronos is Cronos' (albeit the technical spelling is Cronus, but the developers changed it for this series). --JDC808 ♫ 20:32, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
 Gameplay
"..a pair of blades attached to chains that are wrapped around Kratos' wrists and can be swung around to attack enemies, similar to a kusarigama." Who says it's similar to a kusarigama? This needs a ref.
 
It's been removed. It wasn't said by anyone that could be sourced. It was an attempt to try and make readers understand how they are used. --JDC808 ♫ 21:26, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 
"...a large sword that offers alternative combat options." This looks clumsy; can a sword really offer something?
 
A previous reviewer had issues and wanted me to clarify why the character would gain another weapon or magic. To answer the question, in a video game, yes. If it's used in a completely different manner than the other weapon(s), then yes, it's offering alternative combat options. --JDC808 ♫ 21:26, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 
"...chests colored either green, blue, or red,..." Either normally relates to two items.
 
Removed. --JDC808 ♫ 21:26, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 
"—allowing new and more powerful attacks—" New and more powerful? Or just one?
 
Upgrading allows new attacks that are more powerful. --JDC808 ♫ 21:26, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
I removed the "and", because it seemed to indicate there were both new attacks and upgrades for existing attacks, rather than just new attacks that are more powerful. —Torchiest talkedits 22:19, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 
"...kill all cyclops..." The plural is cyclopes --John (talk) 20:25, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Fixed. --JDC808 ♫ 21:26, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
I believe the plural is biclops. Ba-dum-tish. Darkwarriorblake (talk) 23:13, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
 Development
"He said he has the confidence that the team will fix the problems before the game's release." Tense again.
 
Fixed. --JDC808 ♫ 17:26, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
 
"He made point that..." What does that mean?
 
Fixed. --JDC808 ♫ 17:26, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
 Update: based on my looks so far, I still think the article fails on Criterion 1a: "its prose is engaging, even brilliant, and of a professional standard", because its prose isn't brilliant or close to a professional standard. On the contrary I keep finding basic errors of grammar and clunky wording. It would take a complete copyedit to bring this one around. --John (talk) 06:41, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
 
I have to disagree. With the number of copyedits this article has already received and everything fixed up to this point, the article does not need a complete copyedit, and I doubt it's far off from being "brilliant, and of a professional standard," but this is your opinion. --JDC808 ♫ 17:26, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): Jeremy (talk) 20:52, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
  I have worked on this article on and off for a long time now. I think that it includes all that is known (or at least published) about this fairly enigmatic man, who is often called the founder of Chicago. It has been marked as a good article for two years and has completed a peer review. Jeremy (talk) 20:52, 21 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Image check - all OK (PD-1923, own work). Sources provided (some author info is unknown, but PD-1923 applies). GermanJoe (talk) 11:21, 24 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Source review - spotchecks not done 
 Be consistent in whether you include locations for books
 
Done. I've removed the location parameter from the references that used it.—Jeremy (talk) 19:37, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
 Check for doubled periods caused by templates
 
 
 Reed: quotes within quotes. Nikkimaria (talk) 17:58, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Done. I wasn't sure how best to handle this. I've used single quotes for the inner quote. Thanks, —Jeremy (talk) 19:37, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
 [edit] Review by Rschen7754 
 Placeholder; hoping to review soon. --Rschen7754 23:16, 1 February 2013 (UTC) 
 The lead seems a bit short for the length of the article. I know that WP:LEAD says that one paragraph is okay, but I think adding more would be beneficial. --Rschen7754 21:02, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): Midnightblueowl (talk) 14:35, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article status because I have recently undertaken a lot of work to improve it and pull it up to what I hope is FA quality; but I leave others to be the judge of that. Because it deals with a relatively minor, obscure subject, I have been able to use all of the academic, peer-reviewed publications that have ever been published on this issue in order to put together this article. I therefore consider it to be as comprehensive as possible, and can see little space for improvement. Midnightblueowl (talk) 14:35, 21 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Source review - spotchecks not done 
 Page(s) for Field? Wilson? FN33?
Further reading should not contain cited sources
Heselton 2003 or 2004? Nikkimaria (talk) 17:54, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Apologies, an editor had moved the cited sources into the Further Reading after I had initiated this FA nomination; I have corrected this. I have also corrected Heselton to 2004. Field is a newspaper article, long out of print, so I am unsure that we would be able to obtain the page number in this instance, although I shall look into it. Similar problem with Wilson, in that the article is in an obscure and long out of print magazine, but I shall look into it Midnightblueowl (talk) 00:29, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
Update: I have discovered and added the page numbers of Wilson's article to the references. Midnightblueowl (talk) 00:42, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
A scan of the Field article can be found online here. Unfortunately, the page numbers are not visible. Considering that the Doyle White paper doesn't carry them either, I suspect that it will be beyond possibility for us to obtain them, and therefore this particular criteria should be waived in this particular instance. Midnightblueowl (talk) 22:07, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
Forgive my ignorance, but I do not know what you mean by "FN33?". Could you please explain this for me ? Midnightblueowl (talk) 14:58, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
Hi, I believe Nikki is referring to Footnote 33 (Janus-Mithras, Nuit-Hilaria and Mer-Amun 1981). Ruby 2010/2013 17:35, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
Much appreciated Ruby! Footnote 33 refers to the entire book, and not any particular page within it, so naturally there is no need for page numbers there! Midnightblueowl (talk) 00:28, 3 February 2013 (UTC)
 Comment The article should be titled Etymology of Wicca. The current name implies that there is a type of etymology known as Wicca. This is a subarticle of Wicca, and you do not also have 'Wicca (history)', but rather 'History of Wicca', and the sames goes for this one. Reywas92Talk 16:33, 3 February 2013 (UTC)
 
That's an interesting point that you have made Reywas92. When I founded this article, I followed the example set by Witch (etymology) when naming it, although am not averse to making a change if others agree that it is the correct course of action. However, would a better title be Etymology of "Wicca", reflecting that the article deals with the word itself, not the religious movement that it refers to ? Midnightblueowl (talk) 17:40, 3 February 2013 (UTC)
Hm, that article probably ought to be moved too. Quotation marks are generally discouraged in article names, and etymology implies the word itself; here are other etymology articles on WP. Reywas92Talk 00:09, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
Very well, your reasoning and argument seems sound; I have moved "Wicca (etymology)" to "Etymology of Wicca". Thanks for the advice! Midnightblueowl (talk) 19:12, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Kareena Kapoor is an Indian actress who appears in Bollywood films. In July 2008, the article reached a GA status, and subsequently went on to have an unsuccessful FAC. Since then, a lot of hard work has gone into improving the article and bringing it to the place it is today. Now, I think it meets the FA criteria. Please leave your comments, and I'll be more than happy to address any of them. -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 02:15, 21 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Quick comments 
 TIs is mostly mostly very good, but a few quibbles. 
 Rs. 840 million—please use lakhs and crores, else Indians like me will need to do some mental math to understand. Non-Indians have the millions of dollars right next to it anyway.
 
Done
 since we have an abundance of free photos, why not use more? Around one for every sub-section would be nice. Try to add relevant captions, like about her "trademark" lips in Pubic image section.
 
To be honest, adding "around one [image] for every sub-section" would unnecessarily increase the size of the article; I've only added images that help contribute to the article in some way. For example, the image of Kapoor with her mother and sister in the "Early life and background" section shows that the two women have played pivotal roles in her life. And this has been confirmed by Kapoor in several of her interviews. (I've added a new image in the "Public image and character" section discussing her trademark lips.)
 surprised there's no mention of her size zero and the ensuing controversy.
 
There wasn't really a so-called "controversy" about size zero. A lot was written about it by the media but other than that nothing much. Maybe we could say something like: "Kapoor's off-screen life has been subject to wide media coverage in India with frequent press coverage of her weight and diet."
 "would show more a more thoughtful"—huh?
 
I took that from the source without realizing the mistake they made. Fixed it.
 golden-hearted prostitute—I've heard of a hooker with a heart of gold, but is golden-hearted prostitute a common/acceptable phrase?
 
The description of her character in Chameli is taken from here; it is pretty much the same thing as "hooker with a heart of gold".
 subject of considerable critical analysis—source doesn't back this, and only talks of intense tabloid interest.
 
The source states: "While her choice of movies continues to range from interesting to objectionable, Kareena has mastered the art of balancing blockbusters with bloopers". In a way, it is critically analysed, but I'll try finding another source. (A new source was added as well as another one which already exists within the article.)
 total film count? Worth adding in the lead?
over linking—villain, leading lady, Bangladeshi, Netherlands etc. please review throughout, and just these.
 
IMO, I really don't think we need to add her total film count; the same might apply to the over linking part. I agree that some of the terms like 'leading lady' or 'villain' do not need to be linked but others like 'Netherlands', etc do.
 Stage performances is just a smorgasbord of actors' names. I suggest removing all and replacing them with a "performing with several Bollywood contemporaries" to the first sentence.122.172.14.75 (talk) 04:46, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
 
We can't always say "performing with several Bollywood contemporaries"; it might get a bit too repetitive. As you can see that the section combines both (listing actors' names as well as several Bollywood stars).
Thank you for your comments. If possible I would recommend you to get a username—not only will this benefit me but you as well. -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 03:58, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
 Comments
Just a few initial comments now, more to come.
 In the lead, you should probably say "lesser-publicised independent films".
 
Done
 "Her melodrama Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham.... What do you mean by "her melodrama"?
 
Tweaked
 In the lead, Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham is mentioned as her "greatest" commercial success to date. I don't think "greatest" is the right word to use. Also, I don't see the point of mentioning that, because it was neither her first commercial success nor her biggest.
 
Tweaked. I agree that K3G wasn't her "first commercial success" but the reason why it is mentioned is because it was her first "worldwide" success. Also, prior to 3I, K3G was still her biggest success to date.
 The quote in the second line of the career section, "it was probably destined that I was not to be in the film. After all, it was a launch for his son. The whole focus was on the boy. Now I am glad I did not do the movie" would sound better if it were trimmed and written as part of the sentence.
 
Tweaked; removed the last part of the quote.
 In "...but these negative reviews motivated her to improve as an actress by accepting more demanding roles." can be changed to "...but these negative reviews motivated her to accept more demanding roles".
 
Done
 The sentence " The film depicts an online robbery and the Mumbai underworld in which her character, Neha Mehra, becomes involved." is confusing. What does she get involved in? The robbery or the underworld?
 
Tweaked
 "Omkara was embraced by critics...", not sure if "embraced" is the right word in this context for a dictionary.
 
Tweaked
 "Following Omkara Kapoor stopped acting for a short time.." does not sound right. How about "she took a short break" etc.
 
Done
 "She later described this period as a way of "finally getting to do the things I have always wanted to do"" Is this important? If yes, then it would be useful to elaborate on it. --smarojit (buzz me) 12:03, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Removed—now that I think of it, it was kind of redundant. -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 16:20, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
 A few quick style comments Support
 I see very many hacked up modified quotes. For example:
 "were never officially divorced ... [but] ... liv[ed] separately."
"[I]n the best performance of her career so far, [Kapoor] leads Mahi's character through the murky labyrinth of ambition, rivalry and self-destructive tricks of survival in the rat race. Though her character is inconsistent [she] furnishes ... [it] with a rare vulnerability and an exceptional inner life"
I think the second one is missing some ... before the [she], but why do this as opposed to either paraphrasing or quoting directly? It may look to the reader that you are trying to bend the quotes to your liking.
One of the main reasons why I "hacked up" quotes was because they were too long. I've made some adjustments (1st quote: Removing the modifications and sourcing it like a regular sentence; 2nd quote: Paraphrasing it and only quoting the last part.)
Good, but there are several others. Please scan the article for more places where the quotes can be simplified. BollyJeff | talk 16:30, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
I've simplified wherever it's needed. Let me know if you have any more concerns! -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 02:11, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Here is one more: "[Despite having] the worst success ratio among her contemporaries [...] Kapoor is effortlessly honest in her performances". The first and second parts are 6 paragraphs apart (not necessarily related), and the first two words are yours. Looks like it could be a form of cherrypicking, original research, or synthesis. BollyJeff | talk 02:07, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
Rewrote and tweaked it. -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 04:05, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 This article seems to have a more liberal use of parenthesis in the text in places where I normally see commas. Intentional?
 
While copy-editing the article, User:Miniapolis felt that using parentheses would break up long sentences and hopefully make them easier to follow. I thought that made sense! :) -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 16:20, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
I also felt in some instances the parenthesis could be removed. Indeed I myself did so in one instance. Minniapolis is a very seasoned copy-editors, so I think we can stick to his/her suggestion unless someone objects.--Dwaipayan (talk) 04:12, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
 "Following the release of Heroine, Kapoor married Khan on 16 October 2012" There are some other Khans mentioned in this section, but not Saif Ali Khan (except in the heading). His name should definitely be spelled out fully in this spot.
 
Done -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 04:05, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 This may seem picky, but there are only 3 quotations that have the punctuation inside the quote vs around 40 that have it outside. According to the rules in MOS:LQ, it is likely that there should be more than just 3 of the former.
 
Done -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 04:05, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 All of the awards and nominations after 3 idiots are not covered by the source; I did not check the awards prior to that date. Maybe it is best not to rely on one source for all the awards. This link may help though: newer BH BollyJeff | talk 15:14, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 
That was the old BH link and I didn't realize that it didn't cover the newer awards/nominations. I have used the newer BH link to source all her new awards/nominations. -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 02:59, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
 More comments Support
The article is extremely interesting to read, but I am nitpicking on the prose, as it has to be of an excellent standard.
 "Kapoor was initially cast to make her debut" ... doesn't sound too encyclopedic. Also, the quote (as mentioned in the previous set of comments) still doesn't sound interesting. Maybe paraphrasing would help.
 
Tweaked. As for the quote, I've completely removed it and paraphrased it.
 In the description of Refugee, the part "known simply as Refugee" is redundant. Later, you can write "...girl who falls in love with Bachchan's character".
 
Done
 For Mujhe Kuch Kehna Hai, instead of writing " A review of her performance in The Hindu noted that " you can simply say "The Hindu noted that..."
 
Done
 In the first paragraph of the critical acclaim section, "However, when the director again approached her a year later she agreed to do the film; she now viewed it as an opportunity to demonstrate her acting range" can be changed to "However, when Mishra approached her for the second time, she agreed; she viewed it as an opportunity to demonstrate her acting range".
 
Done
 In the same paragraph there is a line that says "...study the dress and mannerisms of sex workers". What do you mean by "study the dress"?
 
Tweaked
 Same paragraph, "another reviewer". Who?
 
Tweaked
 A few paragraphs later, it should be "protagonist of the 2005 drama Bewafaa" and not "in ... Bewafaa".
 
Done
 The review by Nikhat Kazmi for Bewafaa has no quotation marks.
 
That's because we have paraphrased the quote and hence it doesn't require quotation marks.
 Last line of the same paragraph, " Kapoor's performance was generally enjoyed by critics". Replace "enjoyed" with "well received".
 
Done
 In the next paragraph, what do you mean by "portrayed the Desdemona character"?
 
Tweaked
 " It premiered at the 2006 Cannes Film Festival, and was also selected for screening at the Cairo International Film Festival" ==&gt; " It premiered at the 2006 Cannes Film Festival, and was screened at the Cairo International Film Festival".
 
Done
 "While shooting Jab We Met, Kapoor and Shahid ended their three-year relationship". Change to "While filming for Jab We..... three-year long relationship"
 
Done
 "During this period, speculation began to surface that she was dating actor Saif Ali Khan" ==&gt; "During this period, there was speculation in the media that she was dating...".
 
Done
 A paragraph later, "Set in Los Angeles, it was the first Indian film in history to be shot at Universal Studios and featured cameo appearances by Hollywood actors". The "in history" is redundant here.
 
Done
 Same paragraph, "... a woman under house arrest after discovering her husband is a terrorist". Sounds confusing. Needs to be re-worded.
 
Tweaked
 Next paragraph, "On acting with Khan, Kapoor revealed that it was "a dream come true" and stated that her journey as an actress was "finally complete"". This sounds like a fan gushing about a star. I don't see any point in including this.
 
Removed; you do make a valid point.
 "Kapoor had further success in 2011 as love interest for Salman Khan in the romantic drama Bodyguard". Missing "the" before love interest. And should be "...of Salman Khan's character"
 
Done
 Same paragraph. What do you mean by the "most popular film of the year"? Unclear.
 
It means that it was the highest-grossing film of the year in India. If you take a look at the article, it always says "highest-grossing", "one of the highest-grossing", etc. To change it up a bit, I decided to use the "most popular film of the year".
I understand that you did that to avoid being monotonous. But the term "popular" is vague. How and with whom was it popular? --smarojit (buzz me) 06:37, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Tweaked; now says India's highest-earning film of the year. -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 01:59, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 The "2012-present" section begins with "she followed it". As it is the beginning of a new section, drop the "she" and change the line.
 
Done
 "Witty young woman" has been used to describe her character in both Yuva and Ek Main Aur Ekk Tu. Can be modified.
 
Done
 The revenue of Ek Main Aur Ekk Tu is unsourced.
 
I'm unable to find the source that I originally used from BOI for its revenue. However, I found a new source and have modified it to that.
 "Heroine, a drama revolving around the Bollywood film industry through Kapoor's viewpoint as Mahi Arora, a faded star." Not a good sentence. How about "...the Bollywood film industry; Kapoor was cast as Mahi Arora, a fading star". Or maybe something better.
 
Tweaked
 "Kapoor will focus on familiarizing herself with up-to-date global affair issues and watching several news documentaries" ==&gt; "Kapoor will familiarise herself with the latest global affairs and watch several news documentaries".
 
Done
As of now, that's about it. --smarojit (buzz me) 17:29, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Thank you for the kind works Smaro! I really appreciate you taking the time in giving me your inputs! :) -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 23:11, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
  Comment on footnote style There are discrepancies. I see in some newspaper sources, you have mentioned the name of the publisher, while in others you have not. The name of publisher should be present either in all newspaper footnotes, or none (obviously mentioning in none is the easier option). Rediff.com, a website, has not been italicised, but indiatimes, another website, has been italicised (I think most of the websites are not in italics, which is a god style to follow consistently). CNN-IBN, a V channel, should not be italicised. I think Mid Day name should not use the particular style (MiD DAY) of its logo, just mention as Mid Day.--Dwaipayan (talk) 04:05, 24 January 2013 (UTC) 
 I did list the publishers for all newspaper sources befores but User:Legolas2186 mentioned that it wasn't important to add well-known publishers for some newspaper sources. In the case of websites, they shouldn't be italicised; Rediff.com is a website; the reason why I italicised Indiatimes was because I thought it was a newspaper. -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 01:34, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
According to Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style/Text_formatting#Italic_face, websites may or may not be italicised, and magzine websites are usually italicised. However, what I have seen so far is it is more important to maintain consistency within a given article. Regarding publishers, again, consistency within a given article is more important, since publisher parameter is optional. In the FARC of Kolkata, SandyGeorgia pointed out this. Thi apies for location as well. Also, "well-known"ness may differ among readers. So, consistency is perhaps more important.--Dwaipayan (talk) 02:42, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
Done. To maintain consistency: a) Rm the publisher parameter for all newspaper sources, b) Left all websites non-italicised, and c) All magazine websites/journals are italicised. -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 03:32, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
  Support as a contributor to the article. I've long believed it is FA standard and seems to have been improved further. I'd use File:Kapoor at Gitanjali launch2.jpg as the main image though.♦ Dr. ☠ Blofeld 12:23, 25 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Random spotchecking 
 
Sentence "According to Kapoor, the name "Kareena" was derived from the book Anna Karenina, which her mother read while she was pregnant with her." Source [21] verifies this; however, source does not indicate this was said by Kareena herself. Also, the sentence seems a copy-paste from the source, it needs to be tweaked.
Replaced back to the original source where Kapoor (herself) says that her name was derived from the book Anna Karenina. -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 20:29, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 
"...on her mother's side she is Sindhi". Source verifies.
 
"... inspired by the films of Bollywood actresses Nargis and Meena Kumari.". Source verifies.
 
"her mother, who worked at several jobs to support her daughters until Karisma debuted..." Source says, "Mum was always doing something, she single-handedly brought us up. She has a real estate business apart from other small businesses.". I would accept that.
 
"...she studied commerce for two years at Mithibai College in Vile Parle (Mumbai), but later confessed that she only studied there because it was close to her family." Source verifies. The word "home' is probably better than 'family" in this case.
Done -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 20:29, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 
"...Several days into the filming, however, she abandoned the project; Kapoor later explained that she had benefited by not doing the film since more prominence was given to the director's son". source verifies this.
  Will continue later.--Dwaipayan (talk) 13:52, 25 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Continuing random spotchecks 
 
Taran Adarsh quote n Refugee. Source checks out.
 
"...drama Mujhe Kucch Kehna Hai, which became one of the highest-earning films of the year." Source lists the film at 9th position in 25 top-earners. So, although the statement in article is true, perhaps some softer statement would be more suitable, such as ,"...became a hit'.
Tweaked -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 21:29, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 
"... with some critics noting a distinct progression from her earlier roles.' (Regarding Fida). Source checks out.
 
"...the BBC describing her as "a pure natural". Source checks out.
 
"While shooting for Jab We Met, Kapoor and Shahid ended their three-year relationship." Source checks out.
 
"...the tantalisingly seductive prostitute, Rosie...". Copied from here. However, it is just a few words, so could be acceptable. At best, this can be put within a quotation, and attributed to the source.
Sourced -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 21:29, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 
"Talaash eventually emerged as an international success with revenues of 174 crore (US$31.67 million)". Source checks out.
 
"...she would be launching her own line of clothing, becoming the first Indian actress to do so" Source checks out.
 
"... the book was well received by critics selling 10,000 copies within its first twenty days" the numbers are verified. Well-received by the critics may be acceptable, too.
 
"... Kapoor has gained a reputation for discussing her public and private life with no reservations". this source verifies.
So does the other source which is also used to support that claim. -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 21:29, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 
"Her personality has been open to debate and criticism" Source verifies in detail.
 
"she later explained that her honesty and openness was often perceived by the media as arrogance." In the source, she mentions her honesty and openness, but I failed to see that she mentioned her straightforwardness is perceived as arrogance by media.
She explains: "Misquotes and misunderstandings were unfortunate consequences of my attitude, especially when I first entered the film industry [...] But it was a case of forthrightness being misunderstood for a cheeky attitude". -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 21:29, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 
"Kapoor was recognized for her versatility" Sources verify.
  So, overall, spotchecks seem to reveal consistent verification, with only minor problem in a very few instances. Copyvio check by this tool revealed statistically insignificant problem. So far, so good.--Dwaipayan (talk) 14:37, 25 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Support - A few issues with mechanics and style as pointed out above - but once these are resolved I would support it as an FA. I would take heed of Dwai's comments - as usual they are right on target. Great job all. -Classicfilms (talk) 15:21, 25 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Comments on lead 
 " During her career Kapoor has been noted for her performances in a range of film genres, from contemporary romantic dramas to comedies, period films to major Bollywood productions and lesser-publicisedindependent films". I am not sure if this sentence is a good sentence. I tend to prefer "During her career Kapoor has been noted for her performances in a range of film genres, from contemporary romantic dramas, comedies, period films to major Bollywood productions and lesser-publicisedindependent films." (the to has been removed). Again, I am not sure about this. Any comment from anyone else?
 "Kapoor faced the media spotlight at a young age but did not make her acting debut until the 2000 film Refugee.". This construction also does not sound very good, the "but did not make" part. So, althogh the family had actors, is she supposed to debut at an earlier age? Plus, the overall negative construction does not sound too good.
 "In addition to film acting, Kapoor is a stage performer and has launched her own clothing line (in association with retail chain Globus). She is known for being publicly outspoken and assertive, and is recognized for her contributions to the film industry though her fashion style and film roles (both of which have made her a trend-setter for young women).". Do we really need those parentheses?--Dwaipayan (talk) 22:37, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 
I've made some adjustments to the lead including the ones you pointed out Dwaipayanc. Let me know what you think! -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 02:19, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 one more comment on the lead. The lead says, " Kapoor received media attention from a young age.". But the early life section does not mention the media attention that she got from a young age. I think this needs to be changed in the lead. may be, "...exposed to films from a young age" or something like this? This fits with her being born in the filmy family. --Dwaipayan (talk) 02:27, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 
I agree that the early life section does not mention the media attention; it is just intended to show how she became interested in acting. However, as a child she used to attend award ceremonies with her family and would also accompany her sister on-set during filming (mentioned in the public image section) - this introduced her to the media from a young age. -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 04:03, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
Ok, so according to your explanation here, Kapoor was introduced to the media (films, awards etc) world at a young age; but that does not mean media was attentive of her when she was young. So, the article still does not mention that she received media attention from a young age. Either that needs to be changed in the lead, or, info on media's attention/coverage of a young Kareena should be added.--Dwaipayan (talk) 18:22, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
Alright, I've removed the bit about her receiving media attention from a young age. -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 20:41, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
   Support Since I copyedited the article in September 2012 it's not my place to assess the prose, but I believe this article meets WP:FA Criteria; it's comprehensive, well-sourced, neutral, stable and properly formatted. Images have alt text and acceptable copyright status. It may be a bit too long for its subject, but that's a judgment call. Miniapolis 02:06, 27 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Comments: This is very well written and well sourced. I'm no expert in Bollywood, but have read a few arts biographies, so here goes. I have a few thoughts about the prose, some nit-picky. 
 A colon over a semicolon works better here: "During her career, Kapoor has received six Filmfare Awards and has been noted for her performances in a range of film genres; from contemporary romantic dramas, comedies, period films to major Bollywood productions and lesser-publicised independent films."
 
Done
 "Born into a family where her parents, Randhir Kapoor and Babita, and elder sister Karisma were actors, Kapoor faced the media spotlight at a young age..." – (1) "where" should be "in which". Not a spatial relationship. (20 "faced the media spotlight" seems like a colloquial expression. Try something plain and formal, like "received media attention".
 
Done
There's a problem with the current sentence—"Born into a family in which her parents, Randhir Kapoor and Babita, and elder sister Karisma were actors, Kapoor's career began with the 2000 war drama Refugee."—it makes it seem that her career was what was born into the family, not her herself. That, and that the two ideas are very loosely relation, thus lacking strong coherence. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 20:37, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
Taking into account the suggestions you made, I decided to re-write the lead. Please let me know what you think! -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 03:48, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
 One general issue from reading the lead I've found is the odd logical flow. Connect only related ideas using conjunctions. As a result, I find these sentences awkward:
 
"Her film career began with the 2000 war drama Refugee and she subsequently featured in the melodrama Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham..., which became India's highest-grossing film in the overseas market in 2001 and one of her biggest commercial successes to date." – the way of connecting the inital idea with the subsequent one with "and she" is odd sounding. I think we may need to break this up with a semicolon: "Her film career began with the 2000 war drama Refugee, after which she featured in the melodrama Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham...; the latter was India's highest-grossing film in the overseas market in 2001 and one of Kapoor's biggest commercial successes to date." Also note that I changed that I changed "became" to "was"; otherwise, the we could interpret that the film was India's highest-grossing one from 2001 until today, but it was only that in 2001.
Done
"Her portrayal of a sex worker in Chameli (2004) proved to be the turning point in her career, and she was later noted for her performances in the critically acclaimed films Dev (2004) and Omkara (2006)." – Likewise regarding "and she". It's poor idea integration IMO. This would seem better as one, single, flowing idea. So try something like this: "She portrayed a sex worker in Chameli (2004), which proved to be the turning point in her career, and was noted for her performances in the critically acclaimed films Dev (2004) and Omkara (2006)." And since this sentence now begins with "She", the subsequent one cannot, so "Kapoor" probably.
Done
"Her parents reconciled in October 2007[12] and Kapoor explained that they were never officially divorced but lived separately." – more related ideas, but the conjunction doesn't flow well. Just break it up with a semicolon.
Done
 There's also a bit of borderline weasel wording, as we aren't told who makes assertions such as, "She is known for being publicly outspoken and assertive, and is recognized for her contributions to the film industry though her fashion style and film roles both of which have made her a trend-setter for young women." Anything simple to not make these ideas seem so vague. By whom? Critics, authors, the public, heck fans?
 
Reworded; it now says "She is known in the Indian media for being publicly outspoken and assertive...". I've left the rest of the sentence the way it is. Let me know what you think!
Much better. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 12:34, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 I've found the "went on to [verb]" wording a little fluffy and never understood why it couldn't simply be written as the infinitive conjugated in past tense. So instead of "went on to play", why not just "played"?
 
Done
 "Since 2007, Kapoor has been in a relationship with actor Saif Ali Khan whom she married in October 2012." – need a comma after "Khan", since it's a nonrestrictive clause.
 
Done
 As a general note, I like the lead: it's concise, solid and clear, and just what's expected from an overview.
A few obvious ideas, such as "Born in Mumbai, India, on 21 September 1980 into the Kapoor film family, Kapoor is the younger daughter of actors Randhir Kapoor and Babita (née Shivdasani)". Of course she's born into the Kapoor family! If you want to say she was born into a film family, just say "a film family". It's less repetitious too.
 
Done
 I'm not sure how it is done in Indian English, so forgive my ignorance, but I thought "grand-daughter" and "film-maker" had no hyphens and were altogether single words. They might be interchangeable, so I'm not sure.
 
Initially, I had it spelled as "granddaughter" and "filmmaker"; however, spell check on my computer stated that it was incorrect. TBH, I don't even know what the correct spelling is.
If it's the wiki spell checker, it is bad. It seems to have rather limited vocabulary and doesn't accommodate for other dialects. I'm sure the way you had it spelled is correct. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 12:34, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
Changed it back to granddaughter and filmmaker. -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 03:43, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 "After her parents' separation she was raised in Lokhandwala by her mother, who worked at several jobs to support her daughters until Karisma debuted as an actress in 1991." – the "After her parents' separation" is a bit repetitive following the previous sentence. Begin with a simple "She was then raised...".
 
Done
 "Asked about her relationship with her father, Kapoor remarked 'My father is ... an important factor in my life. [Al]though we did not see him often in our initial years, we are a family now.'" – need a comma after "remarked".
 
Done
 Are ellipses in brackets or no brackets when omitting material from a quotation? The latter is recommended per MOS:QUOTE, but either or is fine as long as you use it consistently.
 
According to MOS:QUOTE, we should use ellipses when omitting material from a quotation. I've added them to remain consistent!
  These are general observations from the lead and Early life sections. Bravo on your work; it's well organized and structured, with useful images. What's needed is a fine-tooth comb with which to go over the article, some tweaks and polishing, and we've got the ideal Bollywood biography. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 22:43, 27 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Thank you for your kind words Wikipedian Penguin! I've addressed all your concerns. Please let me know if there is anything else that needs to be done. -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 03:41, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
I've struck through most of my comments. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 20:37, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
I've struck through all my comments. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 19:32, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
 Comments
  Looks good. I have few comments though. 
 "She was then raised in Lokhandwala by her mother..." Is Lokhandwala so prominent that you need a mention and a wikilink? IMHO, No.
 
Removed
 "...during this period, she became immersed in law books and developed a long-lasting passion for reading." Is "became immersed in law books" really required?
 
Removed
 "Later that year Kapoor played the female lead in Santosh Sivan's period epic Asoka, a partly fictionalised account of the life of Ashoka." need a comma after 'year'. Also, prefix Ashoka with "an Indian emperor of the Maurya Dynasty". Not everyone knows Ashoka.
 
Done
 "To prepare for the role, she visited several of Mumbai's red-light districts at night" You may want to link 'red-light districts' to Kamathipura, which is more specific to Mumbai.
 
The reason why I linked 'red-light districts' in general was because of the word "several" in the sentence. Kapoor didn't specifically visit one red-light district area; she visited "several".
 "The film (and Kapoor's performance) opened to predominantly positive reviews by critics..." Parentheses not required.
 
Removed
 "Kapoor is featured in the third chapter as Oberoi's love interest (Mira, a witty young woman)." 'a witty young woman' probably not required but I am not sure of that.
 
I see no harm in having it. 'A witty young woman' is used to describe her character, Mira, in Yuva.
 Too much of Taran Adarsh everywhere and all he says is good-good. Can we have any positive-negative reviews/comments by any other critics?
 
The article is completely neutral and contains a "balance" of positive/negative comments by a variety of critics from different sources. Taran Adarsh's review is only used 3 times: Refugee, K3G and Dev.
 "After graduating from Welham she studied commerce" need a comma after 'Welham'
"Kapoor then appeared in the Abbas-Mustan thriller Ajnabee." need a comma after 'thriller'.
"Kapoor was cast for the first time as a villain in the thriller Fida." need a comma after 'thriller'.
"During the filming of Fida Kapoor began a romantic relationship..." need a comma after 'Fida'.
"Although the film was unsuccessful at the box office" need a comma after 'box office'.
"she was cast as the protagonist of the 2005 drama Bewafaa." need a comma after 'drama'.
  I have checked till "2007–11: Jab We Met and commercial success". Rest will check later. - Vivvt • (Talk) 16:03, 28 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Why are all those commas needed between the descriptors and film names? This article was copy edited, and another article that I am working on was recently copy edited by someone from the GOCE, and no such commas were deemed necessary. BollyJeff | talk 16:14, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
Comma not only is used for separating the clauses, it also indicates where you should take a small pause when you are [loud] reading the article. - Vivvt • (Talk) 16:25, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
A comma may help, but I don't think it is required. My point was why are we second guessing the Wikipedia:WikiProject Guild of Copy Editors? You want to tell them that they are not doing an adequate job? BollyJeff | talk 16:39, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
GoCE has always helped us in writing the articles in better way. However, there is always a chance for improvement. Also, I am not saying or dont want to say what you've said above for GoCE work. Hyderabad, India has failed four times at FAC, in spite of GoCE edits. That does not mean GoCE did blunders there. A reviewer probably still sees some improvement scope for the article. Obviously, for the betterment of the article. - Vivvt • (Talk) 16:50, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
I am not saying that; just wondering if that's how you felt. Okay BOLLYWOOD DREAMZ, it seems as though you will have to do what Vivvt suggests if you want his support here. If another reviewer comes along and says that there are too many commas, then I don't know what to tell you. BollyJeff | talk 17:08, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
I am not sure about this particular comma issue. While speaking, we give a pause on those instances; however, do we always need to use comma in writing? I am not so sure. Moreover, there may be different school of grammar following different ways. Do you have a grammar or some Manual of Style, Vivvt, that recommends such use? Its beyond my knowledge of English. Bollyjeff, you can ask Miniapolis or someone else to opine here. I am sure there will be differing recommendations! --Dwaipayan (talk) 17:14, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
@BollyJeff: My alone's support or oppose would not matter anyway because article is strong enough to pass for itself. The changes should not be done to please the reviewers but strictly for the betterment of the article. The main contributor need not follow all the review comments, if he/she does not agree to it.
@Dwaipayanc: Ideally, the punctuation matters for the narrative. I believe, we need to have it in the writing as well. However, I may be wrong here and elsewhere. I do not have any guidelines or MoS with me to prove my point. Again, experts may clarify the things. - Vivvt • (Talk) 17:25, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
As for the commas, I honestly see no harm in having them. While writing the article, I honestly had them, but Miniapolis had decided to remove it when he copy-edited the article. -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 03:42, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
  I'm surprised to see so many supports with a prose issue evident in the second sentence: 
 
During her career, Kapoor has received six Filmfare Awards and has been noted for her performances in a range of film genres: from contemporary romantic dramas, comedies, period films to major Bollywood productions and lesser-publicised independent films.
 
 "During her career"? When else would she receive awards? I didn't read further. SandyGeorgia (Talk) 06:43, 29 January 2013 (UTC) 
 
If lets say an actor/actress retired, then sometime after their retirement, they receive a lifetime achievement award or something of similar honor. At best, that could have been clarified as "During her film career" as maybe at somepoint she decides to quit film making and move on to a career in broadway or music. --JDC808 ♫ 22:27, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 
SandyGeorgia, what do you mean by "surprised"? Everyone has the right to his/her opinion; some may "suppose", some may "oppose", whilst others may just choose to comment. Ultimately, it is your own prerogative on what you think of the article. I also believe that JDC808 made a good recommendation; will be changing it to "During her film career". -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 04:10, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 Comment "n 2008 Kapoor performed in Shahrukh Khan's Temptation Reloaded 2008, a series of concerts in a number of countries. The show (which also featured Arjun Rampal, Katrina Kaif, Ganesh Hegde, Javed Ali and Anusha Dandekar) was staged at the Ahoy Rotterdam venue in Rotterdam, the Netherlands". The first sentence says it was a multi-city tour; the second sentence says it took place in Rotterdam?--Dwaipayan (talk) 18:52, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Indeed the level of details for all these stage shows seem quite trivial, and seem not to follow any specific criteria. You have mentioned some of the shows, but probably not others. So what was the selection criteria? I don't see mention of any shows that took place in India (unless the world tours included India as well). I have a feeling this section needs tremendous trimming.--Dwaipayan (talk) 18:56, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Reply to your first point: I meant that "the show [...] debuted at the Ahoy Rotterdam venue in Rotterdam, the Netherlands".
Reply to your second point: IMO, details for all these stage shows are not trivial; all of the shows specifically mention where they took place similar to that of Zinta's article. As far as mentioning the shows that took place in India, the "stage performances" section is intended just for her world tours/shows that took place abroad. If we were to list all of her shows in India, it would unnecessarily lengthen the article. -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 04:10, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 I did significant copyedit in several parts (including the lead) of the article, addressing content and language. IMO, the off-screen activities, particularly the stage performances, are detailed unnecessarily and without any pattern or criteria. The three subsection of that section could be merged into one unbroken section, and excessive details about the random stage shows removed. A sentence like, "she performed in many stage shows in India and some concert tours across the globe, including x (2001), y (2004)" and so on. Please opine.--Dwaipayan (talk) 23:08, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 
To begin with, thank you for taking the time in copy-editing the article. I agree with most of them, however there are a few of them which I don't really agree with. I'll be changing some of them. As for merging all her other work into one unbroken section, it wouldn't really be a good idea; it would end up looking like a bunch of random activities/thoughts put together. As I mentioned above, her stage shows are listed in chronological order and just mention where they took place. I honestly don't see the harm in having it. -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 04:10, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
Regarding concert/stage shows: in that case, the article should explicitly mention that only non-Indian tours are listed. Also, are all the non-Indian tours mentioned (just a query)? In any case, then the paragraph should say that she has done many stage shows in India, and the global ones are mentioned here.--Dwaipayan (talk) 04:34, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
All her non-Indian tours are mentioned. BTW do you think it would help if we changed the section title? -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 06:03, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
I don't think we need to change the subsection name.--Dwaipayan (talk) 15:29, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
  More on reference style in general, the titles of the references are in sentence case. There are some discrepancies though. Please read this section and follow the sentence case consistently. The first letter of a word should not be in capital after a colon, for example. Another reference title is "The Most Powerful Actresses in India". This is in title case, not in sentence can. This should be "The most powerful actresses in India". In a given article, one style should be used consistently, irrespective of the different styles used in the actual sources.--Dwaipayan (talk) 00:25, 30 January 2013 (UTC) 
 
Today's featured article, Bastion (video game), uses the same case as the sources. Just saying. BollyJeff | talk 01:20, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
Ya, I see that article has mixed sentence case and title case in its source titles. Well, perhaps we are demanding very strictly :) Actually, during a previous FARC, Sandy pointed this out. I believe this is a good thing to follow, for the sake of consistency in a given article, although views tend to differ in this regard, it seems.--Dwaipayan (talk) 01:57, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
I believe that the tool that helps build citations, Reflinks uses the source case too. BollyJeff | talk 02:44, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
Ok, I am retracting this comment for now (sentence case versus title case issue), unless some other reviewer comments on this.--Dwaipayan (talk) 15:29, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
  Quick comments 
 USD and crore overlinked in many sections.
 
During Kapoor's first FAC, it was recommended that we put in the Indian rupees converter to avoid confusion for non-Indian readers. By putting the currency converter, it automatically links USD and crore; e.g. 200 crore (US$36.4 million).
 PDF references needs (format=PDF) filled in.
 
Done
 The notes section in filmography section should be unsortable per WP:FILMOGRAPHY.
 
Done
 
Done
 Link the first occurrence of The Hindu in refs; same for "Box Office India".
 
Done for The Hindu. I see that the Box Office India article is currently nominated for deletion; once the issue is resolved it'll be linked.
 Pipe-linking "a film family" to Kapoor family seems like WP:EASTEREGG.
 
Removed
 Paragraphs shouldn't start with pronouns. —Vensatry (Ping me) 10:30, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Changed -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 02:39, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
  Quick comments The article is well-written, complete and meets FA criteria. Good work Bollywood Dreamz But, still has some issues. 
 "after which she acted in the melodrama Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham..., one of Kapoor's biggest commercial successes to date"
 Why it is important to use a long sentence which could be replaced by a single word "Hit" or something like that. Since, it is not one of the highest frossing film right now. Then, Bodyguard and golmaal 3 should also be mentioned.
That is because K3G was her first worldwide success. I agree that there were other films of hers like Golmaal 3, Bodyguard, Ra.One that earned more than K3G, but when adjusted for inflation, it has earned more than these films. That is why it is still one of her biggest commercial successes to date.
 "Refugee was the fifth-highest-grossing film in India in 2000"
 So what, the film is 5th grossing film but it is widely considered as critical and commercial failure. Don't you think you are showing it like a blockbuster.
"Widely considered" by whom? The BOI source shows that it was a moderate success and managed to recover some of its profit. No one is "showing it like a blockbuster"; you are just assuming that. All it says that it was the fifth-highest-grossing film of the year.
Change it to moderate success or something like that.Prashant  Conversation  05:19, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 "Mujhe Kuch Kehna hai, a romantic drama opposite Tusshar Kapoor, which became one of the year's most successful films"
 It was just a "hit" nothing more so, why "most"?
Changed to hit.--Dwaipayan (talk) 15:29, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 received her first Filmfare Best Actress nomination -&gt; received her first nomination in Best Actress category at Filmfare or something else. No need to use just "Filmfare Best Actress"...a bit confusing, use original name.
 
Changed to official name.--Dwaipayan (talk) 15:29, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 she was in six films? Maybe "starred" or "featured". It seems these films where unsuccessful because of other and she has no role to play.
"Starred" is reasonable. Changed.--Dwaipayan (talk) 15:29, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 "It was the second Bollywood film with a North American release by a Hollywood studio" why this is important?
 
Dwaipayanc removed it. I'm fine with that! Maybe if it was the first Bollywod film to get a North American release by a Hollywood studio, then I would have left it.
 "However, Golmaal Returns was a financial success with international revenues of 79.25 crore (US$14.42 million)"
 so what was its domestic gross....you are saying that it is the international gross so where is domestic? Sounds confusing.
Dwaipayanc changed it to say "global revenues".
 Box office reports says Kambakkht Ishq was commercial failure in India, Why no use complete information.?
 
What box office reports? You're talking as if I didn't use any sources to support the information. BOI shows that the film was declared "above average". How is that a commercial failure?
Use moderate success or something like that.Prashant  Conversation  05:19, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
How is that necessary? The film doesn't say anything about the film being a success. All it says that it grossed x amount. If it said that it was a commercial success, then that would be a different thing. -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 05:57, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 Reviews says that Kurbaan received "mixed" reviews but I see positive. WHY?
 
Not according to this. Plus if you take a look at the reviews listed on Kurbaan's article you'll see majority of them are positive. Just because a film receives some negative reviews, doesn't mean that it received mixed reviews. If majority of the reviews are positive, then we can say that the film received positive reviews.
7 Khoon Maaf received 80% positive and 20% negative; it is described as "mixed". Kurbaan's ratio is about 40 positive and 60 negative. I can give you the links.Prashant  Conversation  05:19, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
I've conducted an analysis of the reviews Kurbaan received by film critics over here. You can see for yourself! :) -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 18:46, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 "For her portrayal of the tomboy Daboo, Kapoor received Best Actress nominations at various award ceremonies"
 But, I could see only three.
There are definitely more than three (Apsara, Big Star, Filmfare, Global Indian, IIFA, Screen, Stardust, Zee Cine).
 You should include Bodyguard received mixed to negative review.
 
Done by Dwaipayanc
 Any critical analysis for Ra.One (reviews) ...why her critical acclaims are highlighted and critical failures are covered under garland of "commercial success".
 
If you take a look at other FA's, you will see that it's not necessary that we have to add a critical review of an actor from every film. No one is highlighting her critical acclaim and covering her critical failures. If you look at the section, you can see that there are negative reviews mentioned as well (Tashan, GR, KI, Bodyguard). Kapoor's role in Ra.One was similar to that of Zinta and Chopra in KMG and Krissh respectively (in which the actress didn't have much to do).
 "was an economic success, earning 42.17 crore (US$7.67 million) internationally." any domestic datas? Are you saying the film generated good revenues internationally alone?
 
Tweaked
 Many reviews says Kapoor received "mixed to negative review" for Heroine but, I could see only praise. Again, why her acclaim is so highlighted.? and criticism has been covered?
 
Again, we are not hiding anything. Majority of sources (1, 2, 3) show that although the film received negative reviews, Kapoor's performance was well received. These sources are good enough; however, if needed I'm willing to put together an analysis of all the reviews she received for the film, something like what I did for her other films.
I can show you, how she has been criticized. Here's are the links showing "mixed" response from critics for her performance in Heroine [22],
  [23], [24], [25], [26].This says it all, she got some positive and some negative, which means "mixed". I think it is clear now.Prashant  Conversation  05:19, 31 January 2013 (UTC) 
 
I just don't know what to say. Barring the one from OneIndia and to some extent NDTV, the other three are positive. As I said for the analysis of films, which pretty much can be applied to the analysis of her critical reviews, some mixed reviews doesn't mean that the overall reception was "mixed". I think I will have to list all the reviews for you to see. -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 05:54, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
I've conducted an analysis of the reviews Kapoor received for Heroine (including the ones you mentioned) over here. You can see for yourself! :) -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 06:33, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
Ok...it has been resolved. .Prashant  Conversation  09:40, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 In many places, readers are made to be confused..whether the revenues are from international markets alone or worldwide. That should be used properly. Same for Talaash.
 
They were changed.
 Again, you should correct "talaash received mixed reviews."
 
The word "predominantly" was used. As I said before, just because a film receives some negative reviews, doesn't mean that it received mixed reviews. Plus if you take a look at the reviews listed on Talaash's article you'll see majority of them are positive. Two other sources: 1 &amp; 2. -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 03:29, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
I'm ok with talaash. You may use talaash "generally" received positive reviews.
  Prashant  Conversation  14:20, 30 January 2013 (UTC) 
 More comments 
 Again, I can't help myself to point it again. This sentence is misleading the readers over the film performance of Refugee. "Refugee was the fifth-highest-grossing film in India in 2000".
 
Tweaked
 This is too much, last time it didn't got my eyes..."Kapoor portrayed Kaurwaki—a Kalingan princess, with whom Ashoka falls in love—and received her first nomination for Best Actress at the Filmfare Awards.[19] While the film received generally positive reviews". Positive review for Asoka, Check the link was a commercial and critical failure.
 
This shows that film received a 100% rating. I know that wasn't the case completely so I changed it to generally.
 Her Performance and analysis says ...Despite the least success rate among her contemporaries....[...], I see a complete reversed version as all her hits here, are tagged with "one of the years biggest hits or success". Why it is important to say "one of the years biggest". Can't you use "was a box office success", "major success". Use "one of....." only in the major success's like Golmaal 3.
Same for Jab We Met, "The film was received favourably by critics and became one of the year's most successful films, with a domestic box office of 30.25 crore (US$5.51 million)."
 
Tweaked
 Again, The film earned over 84 crore (US$15.29 million) worldwide, but was a critical failure. So, Don't tell what it sounds like.(like a blockbuster which was a critical letdown).
 
It may sound like that to you. As I said before, all it says that the film grossed x amount. Anyways, I just don't know to say anymore. Tweaked
 The film (which marked the directorial debut of Rensil D'Silva)....who?(Is the director has won 10National Award and is regarded ad India's best director). Every second Director Debuts with first film, doesn't mean...we should highlight.
 
What? Kurbaan was his directorial debut; your comments don't make sense at all.
 During her 2010 appearance in the NDTV Greenathon -&gt; on the NDTV Greenathon Prashant  ✉  10:43, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Done -- Bollywood Dreamz talk 18:55, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
  Support As I said earlier, the article is well-written, complete and neutral. Hence, I support it. Congratulations to Bollywood Dreamz for his work on the article. Cheers!Prashant  ✉  03:07, 1 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Random note: I am appalled by some of the comments that are being posted here. Where is this nomination going? --smarojit (buzz me) 18:35, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): Ironholds (talk) 22:56, 20 January 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article because... I think it's great? I'm not sure what to write here, except that I'm very proud of the article and look forward to the review :). Ironholds (talk) 22:56, 20 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Comments from George Ponderevo 
 "It was not a common surname, being limited to one family, but the family itself was relatively respected". I'm not at all sure what you're trying to get at here. If the surname had been common the family would have been respected automatically?
Fixed. Ironholds (talk) 17:55, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
"The origins of the name prior to that are uncertain". That a few people before before Coke had the same surname in no way explains the origins of the surname. And are the origins not still uncertain?
"... theories are that it signified a river among early Britons". The river was among early Britons?
Fixed. Ironholds (talk) 17:55, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
" Francis Bacon, his main competitor, was noted as a philosopher and man of learning, but Coke had no interest in such concepts." Was it really the concept he had no interest in, as opposed to the subjects?
Fixed. Ironholds (talk) 17:55, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
"... the Third Amendment, on the other hand, takes influence from the Petition of Right." Strangely unidiomatic. Why not "is/was influenced by"?
Fixed. Ironholds (talk) 17:55, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
" Coke argued that the judges of the common law were those most suited to making law, followed by Parliament, and that the monarch was bound to follow any legal rules. This was because a judge, through his professional training, internalised what Alan Cromartie referred to as 'an infinity of wisdom' ...". What exactly is the "this" at the start of that second sentence referring to?
That the judges were most suited to making law. As with the tears comment (see below) I'm struggling to understand the confusion, but I appreciate I'm probably more familiar with the text and the subject than most. Ironholds (talk) 17:55, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
"This" could refer to Coke's argument about the judges, the comment about the position of the monarch, or why he put forward the argument in the first place. Beginning a sentence with "this" almost always leads to ambiguity. George Ponderevo (talk) 18:57, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Gotcha; fixed :). Ironholds (talk) 21:23, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 "Coke's theory meant that certainty of the law and intellectual beauty was the way to see if a law was just and correct ...". In what sense was Coke's position a theory?
Fixed. Ironholds (talk) 17:55, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
"... he was summoned before Elizabeth I, who berated him to the point of tears before confirming him as Solicitor General." Who was in tears? Elizabeth or Coke?
I'm struggling to see the confusion, here; how many times in literature have you seen someone cry from shouting? :P. Ironholds (talk) 17:55, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
We're discussing what you've written, not what I've ever seen. It's quite possible that Coke was one of Elizabeth's favourites, and it pained her so much to berate him that she was in tears. George Ponderevo (talk) 18:57, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
Fixed. Ironholds (talk) 21:23, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Several of the Harv links are broken: #3, #107, #189, #219, #228
Fixed; my apologies. Ironholds (talk) 17:55, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
Not quite fixed. Three entries in the Bibliography aren't used as citations: Campbell (2002), Ibbetson (1984), and Simpson (2004). George Ponderevo (talk) 19:04, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
Fixed. Ironholds (talk) 21:23, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Why is "king" capitalised in sentences such as "Coke himself attended divine service with the new King on 22 May ...", but "monarch" isn't in "... the judges held their positions only at the pleasure of the monarch."? George Ponderevo (talk) 02:34, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
Because 'King' is a title, while 'monarch' is not. Ironholds (talk) 21:23, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
  Comments from John 
 Family background and early life
Why is England linked (twice) from the infobox?
"members of the family from the 1400s" Are we talking about the decade or the century?
" it was simply an attempt" Dislike "simply"
"was pronounced "kuke" during the Elizabethan age itself, although it is now pronounced "cook"" - what is the difference?
If someone wants to help me IPA that, I'd be most grateful :). The practical difference is Kuke as in Puke versus Cook as in book. Ironholds (talk) 20:07, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
"but this is most likely simply because the names" Simply again!
"One estimate by Allen Boyer is that Edward was the fourth child based on baptism registers." Sentence needs recast to avoid ambiguity
  Source review - spotchecks not done 
 Be consistent in whether you include locations for books
Fixed. Ironholds (talk) 23:18, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Check for doubled periods caused by templates
If you can see them, would you mind pointing them out to me? Ironholds (talk) 23:18, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Block and Pound. You'll only be able to see them in read mode, as one period's hand-entered and the other automatic. Nikkimaria (talk) 00:46, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
Fixed! Ironholds (talk) 22:54, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
Boyer 2004: italicization is backwards (applies to all chapters from this book)
That's a flaw of the template rather than the article. If you can point to a better way to represent essays within a multiple-author work I am happy to use it :). Ironholds (talk) 23:18, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Use the chapter parameter for the essay title and the title parameter for the work title. Nikkimaria (talk) 00:46, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
Aha; great :D Ironholds (talk) 22:54, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
Check consistency of wikilinking in Bibliography - for example, Cambridge UP is linked in Caldecote but not Allott or Baker
Fixed (or should be). Ironholds (talk) 22:54, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
No citations to Campbell 2002, Simpson 2004, Ibbetson 1984
Fixed. Ironholds (talk) 23:18, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Campbell 2005: I believe Elibron is a replica publisher, so check if there was a previous one
Fixed. Ironholds (talk) 23:18, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Corwin 1929: quotes within quotes
Fixed. Ironholds (talk) 22:58, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
Be consistent in whether you include publisher and page numbers for journals in Bibliography. Nikkimaria (talk) 17:47, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Yup; trying to, but on occasion I can't identify the publisher. I'd rather display additional information than less :). Ironholds (talk) 23:18, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Thanks, all, for your comments :). work is...more hectic than I had intended it to be this week, but I will try to get to this stuff in the next couple of days. Ironholds (talk) 17:00, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
  Comments from Sarnold17 
 Hello; I find this to be an excellent and interesting article on a very important Elizabethan-era Englishman. I look forward to giving this my support. I'm working my way through, and will likely have a boatload of comments, primarily dealing with prose. Some of the comments likely spring from my incomplete understanding of English as used by the English, so please help me learn.Sarnold17 (talk) 19:27, 26 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Lead 
 My impression is that almost all readers will see his name and pronounce it like the common soft drink. Also, my feeling is that most readers don't know how to interpret phonetic symbology, even though it looks fancy and scholarly. For these reasons, it would be good to let the reader know right off the bat how to pronounce this guy's name, and therefore I would write "(pron.: /ˈkʊk/ ("cook"), formerly /ˈkuːk/" The old pronunciation is a bit more problematical; see later discussion.
awesome! Thanks so much for IPA-ing it :). Ironholds (talk) 23:20, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
"was used to justify the voiding of the Stamp Act 1765 and writs of assistance, which led to the American War of Independence," This is unclear. Do you mean voiding both the Stamp Act and also writs of assistance? Or do you mean justifying writs of assistance, but also justifying the voiding of the Stamp Act? In other words, I don't understand his influence on writs of assistance. Would it be easier (or correct) to instead use the Navigation Acts in place of writs of assistance?
Voiding the both of them; fixed :). Ironholds (talk) 23:20, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
  Family background and early life 
 "of South Greenhoe, now Swaffham in around 1150" Recommend "now the Norfolk town of Swaffham", since we don't know from what part of England the family originated.
Fixed. Ironholds (talk) 23:20, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
Recommend "Norwich" be wikilinked, since it is introduced for the first time.
Fixed. Ironholds (talk) 23:20, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
The sentence in paragraph two "The name "Coke" itself was pronounced "kuke" during the..." should be moved to the previous paragraph, since this is where you are discussing the family name, and that is a more suitable place to discuss the pronunciation. As for the pronunciation, "kuke" to me would be pronounced as in the word "cuckoo". This may be an Americanism, but the word "cuke", which is short for cucumber, would be more suitable. Is this not used by the English? If this doesn't work, then you could say it begins like the word "queue".
Over here I'd pronounce it 'kook', I guess, which is closer to the original; will tweak. Ironholds (talk) 23:20, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
I would totally eliminate the discussion on the order of the children because (1) it is not important and (2) it is basically speculation. The reader doesn't need to know that the order of the children is not known.
Fixed. Ironholds (talk) 23:20, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
"Winifred remarried to Robert Bozoun" Recommend "his widow married Robert Bozoun" since the reader may not remember who Winifred is, and also because he had a daughter named Winifred.
Fixed. Ironholds (talk) 23:50, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
  Education and call to the Bar 
 "by the age of 18 the students have learnt" Is "learnt" proper English? My American spell checker balks at the word. Is the word "endight" the correct word, and not "enlight"? If it is a valid word, could it be linked to wictionary? I haven't seen the word before.
Learnt is acceptable over here, at least (I am informed it is the "past participle, past tense of learn (Verb)"). On endight, I've done a bit of etymological searching (after verifying that it's not a typo on my part). What I suspect is that it's a form of 'endite', which is an ancient form of wd:indite; I've linked that in the text :). Ironholds (talk) 23:50, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
Is "matriculated to" a proper construction? I like to think of matriculate as being akin to enroll, and I've always said "matriculated at". Thoughts?
Pokes at goggle suggest it can be used (or is commonly used) either way; I tend to go for 'matriculated to', in the same sense as someone is 'returned to' Parliament. Ironholds (talk) 23:50, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
"Little is known of his time at Trinity – he certainly studied rhetoric and dialectics under a program instituted in 1559, but although he is considered to have had all the intelligence to be a good student little is known of his academic achievements there." This is a very long sentence and I find "but although" to be an awkward construction. Recommend: "Little is known of his time at Trinity, though he certainly studied rhetoric and dialectics under a program instituted in 1559. His biographers felt he had all the intelligence to be a good student, though a record of his academic achievements has not been found."
 "It was here he first drew notice, arguing well in an Inner Temple moot and asserting that the Inner Temple cook had failed to prepare edible food." He first drew notice? Does this mean he was noticed? If so, then by whom, and with what outcome?
 "Polson suggests..." We haven't been introduced to Polson, so you might mention that he was a historian/biographer/critic or whatever, and include his first name for this first encounter.
  Practice as a barrister 
 "and his reputation was such that when he retired to his house after an outbreak of the plague, "nine Benchers, forty barristers, and others of the Inn accompanied him a considerable distance on his journey". I can sense that these folks wanted to spend time learning from him, but I don't quite understand why they accompanied him en route to his house. Did they come to stay with him, or just travel with him? Can this be clarified?
 "...and during the 1580s Coke was employed by the Howards to see off lawyers employed by the crown who argued that the Howards' lands were forfeit due to the treason of the 4th Duke of Norfolk." "to see off lawyers" sounds a bit awkward. Recommend "to counter the lawyers employed..." Also, shouldn't it read "were forfeited"?
 "Coke's argument in the case formed the first definition of consideration." You've run several cases together here, so the question is--which case? Perhaps say "Coke's argument in this last case formed..."
  I'm taking a break and will return with more comments later.Sarnold17 (talk) 19:27, 26 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Here is my next round of comments (will try to finish on 29 Jan).Sarnold17 (talk) 00:46, 28 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Politics 
 Opening paragraph: the word "secured" used twice in one sentence. Perhaps change one to "obtained". Also, I'm accustomed to "on their behalf" instead of "in their behalf" but don't know the customary way to say it in England. The construction "was returned for Aldeburgh" doesn't make sense to me. Do you mean "returned to Aldeburgh"?
  Solicitor General and Speaker 
 "It is implied that this was a narrow victory..." Generally, avoid using passive voice. Who made the implication? Perhaps: "This was likely a narrow victory, due in part to Coke's defence..."
  Attorney General 
 "The charges were never brought, as on 8 February 1601 Devereux ordered his followers to meet at Essex House" doesn't make sense. What do Devereaux's actions have to do with the charges not being made? I think you need to say something like: "The charges were never brought because of an incident that soon transpired. Devereaux ordered his followers to meet at Essex House on 8 February 1601, but when emissaries led by Thomas Egerton and John Popham were sent to him the following day, they were taken hostage."
 What are "pikemen"? Should be linked or described.
  Common Pleas 
 "His conduct is noted as "from the first, excellent..." Noted by whom? If possible, avoid passive voice.
  Court of High Commission 
 "...amongst both common lawyers and Members of Parliament..." Is "amongst" as suitable as "among"? The former sounds folksy and not encyclopedic to my American ear; is this good high English in England?
 Who is P.B. Waite, and why is he an authority?
 "known as Fuller's Case after the defending barrister" should read "named Fuller's Case after the..."
 "the group were dismissed..." group is singular; should read "group was..."
 "Coke challenged this, saying "the King in his own person cannot adjudge any case, either criminal – as treason, felony etc, or betwixt party and party; but this ought to be determined and adjudged in some court of justice, according to the Law and Custom of England"." This quote needs a citation. Also, it has an opening dash but no closing dash. Is this accurately quoted? It should have a dash following "etc"
  Dr. Bonham's Case 
 "19th and 20th century academics" should be "Nineteenth and twentieth century academics" since it begins a sentence.
 "Some academics, such as Edward Samuel Corwin, have argued..." this sentence is excessively long, and should be divided.
  King's Bench 
 "had him found guilty" should read "found him guilty"
  Return to politics 
 "In June of 1614" should read "in June 1614"
 what is a "Cantabrigian"? should be linked or described
 "It was reported, Sir Edward "aunswered him somewhat short, that Sir Thomas needed not to trouble himself so much about it, for that he belonged to neither universitie." " this is awkward, and difficult to decipher; perhaps summarise without a quote.
  Monopolies 
 "Coke was then imprisoned in the Tower of London from 27 December before being released nine months later" needs rewording, perhaps: "...in the Tower of London in December 16__, but released nine months later."
  Petition of Right 
 "being unable to speak due to their tears" this sounds unusual; what are you really trying to say? There should be a better way to say they were afraid.
  Following are the last of my comments.Sarnold17 (talk) 23:16, 30 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Retirement 
 "spending his spare time making revisions to his written works" having spare time when you retire is almost an oxymoron. I would just say "spending time making revisions..."
 "his desire to complete his writings and advanced age" to complete his advanced age? To avoid possible confusion or stumbling by the reader, I recommend: "his desire to complete his writings coupled with his advanced age..."
 "Coke was still in good health, despite his advanced age, and took daily exercise." "advanced" is redundant. Recommend: "Despite his age, Coke remained in good health, and exercised daily."
 "As he was on his deathbed the Privy Council ordered that his house and chambers be searched, seizing 50 manuscripts, which were later restored – his will, however, was permanently lost" Recommend: "While he was on his deathbed the Privy Council had his house and chambers searched, seizing... which were later restored, though his will was permanently lost."
 "A Latin inscription on the monument..." Recommend breaking into two sentences.
  Personal life 
 first image in this section does not have alt text.
 "Paston was noted by Woolrych as an "incomparable" woman..." Since much attention is given to the father named Paston, I would call her "Bridget" and not "Paston" in this sentence, to avoid confusion, because I immediately thought you were talking about the father, not the daughter.
 "After Bridget Paston died in 1598..." Recommend "Following the death of his first wife in 1598, Coke married..."
 "Despite the marriage Coke was not buried next to Hatton, but instead next to Bridget Paston, who his daughter Anne declared was Coke's "first and best wife" " Recommend: "Coke was buried beside his first wife, who was called his "first and best wife" by his daughter Anne." You don't need to qualify this with "Despite the marriage..." because it is not unusual for a person who remarries to be buried beside their first spouse, particularly if that spouse is the parent of most of the children.
 "Hatton and Coke had two children, both daughters..." Recommend: "Coke had two children with his second wife, both daughters,..."
  Reports 
 "during his career, Coke would note down earlier cases he had heard of..." "note down" is awkward. Recommend either "jot down" or else "Coke took note of earlier cases..." Ditto in the next sentence.
 "Although lent to friends and family, and therefore in slight public circulation, Coke never formally published his entire Reports during his lifetime" Coke wasn't loaned to friends and family. This should read "Although loaned to friends and family, and ..., Coke's Reports were never formally published during his lifetime."
 "In July 1634, officials acting on order of the King had seized Coke's papers, and between then and a 1641 motion in the House of Commons restoring those papers that could be found to Coke's eldest son,..." This doesn't make sense; break up into two sentences for coherence.
  Institutes 
 check the Jefferson quote, because the construction "learning on in the orthodox doctrine..." appears to have an error.
  Jurisprudence 
 Who is Cromartie? He should be introduced with his qualification.
 Was John Selden introduced? I don't recall.
  General 
 While this isn't a show stopper, I was disappointed to find no mention about Coke's influence on Roger Williams in this substantial article. Since Williams was mentored by Coke, and then became one of the great religious figures in American history, this is really a pretty big deal. A recent book (2012) on Williams discusses the relationship between the two men, though I have not yet read the book. A commentary by the author concerning a review in the NY Times can be found here.
 
 Comments from Wehwalt 
 Quite good and engaging, but I have my usual list of quibbles: 
 
Consider including in parentheses the alternate name of the ex officio oath, simply because the Star Chamber is well-known.
"The name "Coke" itself ..." Consider putting this sentence in a footnote.
"something that later served Edward well" Perhaps "a connection that later served Edward well" ? It's not quite certain whether the something is the connection to the Earl, or the marriage.
" and daughters second" I'd cut this as unneeded.
"Winifred remarried to Robert Bozoun" Which Winifred?
"A property trader, Bozoun ..." this sentence gets between the influence and the evidence thereof, and I suggest it be moved slightly. Perhaps, "Robert Bozoun, a property trader and a member of an old family. Noted for his piety and strong business acumen (he had once forced Nicholas Bacon to pay an exorbitant amount for a piece of property), Bozoun had a tremendous influence on the Coke children." You could even consider cutting the new parenthetical ...
"little is known" Three times in three sentences. I suggest you vary one phrase diversely.
"the Inns of Chancery, including Clifford's Inn, served as a place of initial legal education" On balance, I think a plural form is better ("a place") although granted, I can see a case for the other. Consider rephrasing to avoid.
"other pieces of high culture at the Inns" This sounds a bit odd to me, but perhaps it is just me.
If he began is practice immediately in 1578, how was it his first case was not until 1581?
"forcing them to start the case anew.[38] Cromwell brought the case again, " a bit repetitive.
"paid off any royal clerks" Paid off? As in bribed?
"see off" seems a bit informal. Perhaps "oppose" or "defeat"?
Why the Third Duke but the 4th Duke? And a link to the treacherous one?
" his third was Slade's Case," His third what? Famous case?
"Coke's argument in the case formed the first definition of consideration." Wouldn't it have been the judgment, which presumably incorporated his argument?
Politics
"Coke had earned the favour of the Dukes of Norfolk ... With their support, " Were there several Dukes of Norfolk at a time?
"and thanks to the influence of the Cecil family" As this is the first you've mentioned them, it's not clear why they should exert themselves on behalf of Coke.
"Although confirmed on 28 January 1593, he did not take up his post until the state opening of Parliament on 19 February 1593, a position he held at the same time as that of Solicitor General." Problem with this sentence.
"The idea of a peaceful, swift Parliament" given that the purpose was to impose taxes for war, "peaceful"'s a bit jarring. Quiet?
"due to religious problems." Perhaps, "due to religious conflict"?
"as Speaker of the House of Commons (whose job was to introduce any bills)" If his job was to introduce bills, how is it the bills which caused all the trouble were introduced?
"a day of respite". Perhaps "a day's delay"?
"opened up" somewhat informal phrases such as this are slightly jarring, perhaps because of the 16th century subject matter.
" A day later a group of emissaries led by Thomas Egerton and John Popham were sent to him and taken hostage." Huh?
The material concerning Devereaux perhaps can be cut a bit?
James I
The phrasing used implies there was doubt that James would be able to successfully claim the throne, but this isn't backed up in the article.
"the new royals." Surely James was royal from birth?
Judicial work
" known as Fuller's Case after the defending barrister, Nicholas Fuller." This can be read to say that the case was named after the barrister who had the defense in it.
"Coke's first case of note was Peacham's Case" I'd insert a "there" somewhere in this phrase.
" which saw the King's actions as him tampering with justice." I would omit "him"
Return to politics
James's action in ordering Coke's re-election seems so surprising (especially in light of subsequent events) that it almost begs for further explanation as to motivation.
Again with the link to Cecil! And title! I think he appears often enough that he need only be linked on first appearance
I would mention the term "letters patent" much higher in the paragraph. People may think of "patents" in a rather different sense.
You seem to me to be inconsistent in your capitalisation of "crown".
" Coke was briefly restrained from acting in Parliament by Charles;" I would cut this phrase, it is implied in the rest of the sentence.
"the person, for all others are accessory to it" I don't see how this fits the rest of the quoted matter.
"eventually rejected the Resolutions formally" I would boil this down to "rejected the Resolutions"
"Coke then undertook the central role" Strike "then" I would, especially since the last action was Charles' rejection
"The resulting debate led to some MPs being unable to speak due to their tears, fearing that the King was threatening them with the destruction of Parliament. " In modern parlance this sounds a bit hysterical. I suggest quoting from some contemporary description, if you have one.
"eventually affirmed". As the timespan referred to is between April and 17 May, suggest "eventually" can be dispensed with. I would give the year, it's a significant date.
Retirement
"effectively retired" Perhaps just "retired"?
Personal life
"through which" picky, but there's nothing that this refers to.
I gather Elizabeth predeceased Coke, but probably you should be clearer about this. (the infobox confirms this)
Writings
I'm not thrilled about the firstly and secondly; it looks odd and I wonder why one firstly and the other secondly? Is there a ranking?
Should Institutes and also Reports be italicised in the Gest quote?
"His Law Reports, known as Coke's Reports, were an archive of law reports" perhaps one "reports" can be massaged out. This sentence can profitably be divided.
"four of which are still lost" strike "still", I would.
" by copying out and repeating cases found in earlier law reports, " This sounds like verbatim copying, how is it original work?
"Although lent to friends and family," slight disconnect in this sentence, the initial phrase should refer to the subject, which in this case is Coke, not his reports.
"While the Reports were intended " this sentence could also advantageously be split.
"There are also factual inaccuracies;" I suggest you buy a Coke for this sentence and place it somewhere therein.
Jurisprudence
" Alan Cromartie referred to as "an infinity of wisdom"" I would think something from Coke would be better suited here, since it is an important point we should hear from him.
"John Selden" I would either remind the reader of who he is or else link again. It's been a while.
Bacon has played a major part in this article and need not be linked again.
"play with it". I do not find this a pleasing phrase, as it implies arbitrariness (or perhaps capriciousness).
Legacy
It might be worth mentioning that Casement was found guilty. A "1916" tossed somewhere in there might be helpful to the reader, who has been wandering among the Jacobeans.
Character
The description of Coke as something of a poor courtroom lawyer seems rather different than what I had pictured based on the biographical sections. Possibly he worked best from a script.
General
A script tells me that Campbell, Ibbetson, and Simpson, listed in the bibliography, are not used.--Wehwalt (talk) 02:12, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
  Comments from Aa77zz 
 In the Bibliography section it would be better if each journal article entry included the first and last pages of the article – in addition to a specific page number in the References section. Aa77zz (talk) 10:09, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): Disavian (talk) 19:23, 20 January 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article because I believe it meets the criteria, and covers a rather notable subject in detail. I took a good deal of time in Feb 2012 to dramatically improve the article, but I'm just now nominating it. I look forward to reviewer comments. Disavian (talk) 19:23, 20 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Working on checklinks results, looks like there are only two dead links. Disavian (talk) 19:37, 20 January 2013 (UTC)
Checklinks is now clean. Every problem link was apparently fixable. Disavian (talk) 19:50, 20 January 2013 (UTC)
  Oppose, at least until the prose is cleaned up. Afew examples of what I'm talking about: 
 "The students of Georgia Tech affectionately dubbed him "Funk Masta G. Wayne" during his presidency in accordance with the expansion and growth he encouraged in urban Atlanta ...". Accordance is clearly not the right word there.
That was changed from "in accordance with" to "due to". diff Disavian (talk) 17:53, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
"... Clough believed it detracted from the entirety of the exhibition, in which he believed 'to be a powerful exhibit about the contributions of gay and lesbian artists'".
changed "in which he believed" to "which he said was" Disavian (talk) 17:57, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
"Clough has earned numerous awards and honors during his career ... Dr. Clough has also earned a George Westinghouse Award from the American Society for Engineering Education". Why do we suddenly start calling him Dr. Clough?
That appears to have been fixed. Disavian (talk) 17:53, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
" Clough's decision was widely criticized, but Clough responded that he was protecting the Smithsonian's larger educational mission." Rather awkward and unnecessary repetition of "Clough".
Changed to "This decision was widely criticized" Disavian (talk) 17:53, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
" In 2011, Georgia Tech opened the G. Wayne Clough Undergraduate Learning Commons building to honor his commitment to undergraduate students". I'm quite certain that's not at all the reason they opened it, but it may be the reason they named it as they did.
Changed from "opened the ... building to honor his commitment" to "opened the ... building named in honor of his commitment" Disavian (talk) 17:53, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
"They have had two children, Eliza and Matthew." Don't they still have two children?
They now have two children. Disavian (talk) 17:53, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
"There Clough met his wife, Anne Olivia Robinson, while he was in middle school." No, he didn't meet his wife, he met his future wife.
This has been fixed. Disavian (talk) 17:53, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
The Early life section recounts events up until 1994, when Clough was almost 53. Can't really consider that to be "early life". Also, much of the section isn't about either Clough's early life or education, it's about his academic career before becoming President of Georgia Tech. Overall, I think that there's undue emphasis on Clough's time at Georgia Tech compared to his time at Virginia Tech, for instance.
The article has been resectioned a bit, and his research at Virginia Tech has been beefed up a bit. Disavian (talk) 17:53, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
"Clough's tenure was especially focused on a dramatic expansion of the Institute; over $1 billion was spent on expanding or improving the campus. These projects included the completion of several west campus dorms ...". What projects? The previous sentence was talking about tenure, not projects. Where did the money come from anyway?
Projects as in specific buildings, or collections thereof. A great deal of campus construction happened while he was president, and one of the largest responsibilities of the president is fundraising for whatever they want to build next. And it would be more accurate to ask where the money didn't come from - many of the buildings were funded by alumni donations along with funds specially procured from the state. I don't know how to encapsulate those facts into the article, though. Disavian (talk) 17:53, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
"Clough's father died in February 1988, and his mother died in August 1994." Is that really relevant? And again, what does it have to do with either Clough's early life or his education?
They're biographical facts. The sentence has been somewhat adjusted, I believe, and the section has been renamed to "research". Disavian (talk) 17:53, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
Which makes it doubly incomprehensible why the deaths of Clough's parents should be tagged on to the end of that section. Let's remind ourselves that this a biography of Clough, not his parents. Did their deaths affect him in any significant way for instance? George Ponderevo (talk) 01:47, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
The timing of the deaths of his parents is significant since they both died shortly before Clough became President of Georgia Tech, which provides relevant biographical information. In other words, Clough was not able to share his increasing success and greater accomplishments with his parents due to the timing of their deaths. I recommend moving the information regarding his parents' deaths to another section of the article to resolve the concerns described above. Mistercontributer (talk) 03:52, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
  I want to stress again that these are just a few examples, not a list of issues that if addressed will automatically switch my vote to support. My overall impression is that the prose is generally rather clunky, particulary the final Honors and awards section. George Ponderevo (talk) 22:15, 20 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Thanks for your suggestions. I have been absolutely slammed with work this week, but I have had a couple people come in and copyedit the article. If I get some more time - possibly on Friday - I will look to see what of your suggestions has been resolved. Disavian (talk) 01:30, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Okay, had a look through them, good suggestions. I replied to the ones I could. Thanks for taking the time to copyedit and review the article. Disavian (talk) 17:53, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 Comments (edit conflict!) I was the GA reviewer. Here are some issues:
"A graduate of Georgia Tech, in civil engineering, he was the first Georgia Tech alumnus to be the president of Georgia Tech." - too many occasions of Georgia Tech. Perhaps remove the second mention, and replaced the third with "that university"
That has since been changed to "A graduate of Georgia Tech, in civil engineering, he was the first alumnus to serve as President of the Institute." - any thoughts on that phrasing? I think we might need to uncapitalize president and institute. Disavian (talk) 18:00, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
"during which time" - I think should be "during when"
I went with just "when". Disavian (talk) 18:00, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
"Daniel Clough, the youngest of three children.[4][5]" - I think as it currently reads it may rather mean that his father was the youngest of three children
I believe that has been fixed. It's now "...as the youngest of three children born to Bessie Johnson and Daniel Clough" Disavian (talk) 18:03, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
"after which the family moved to Chattanooga, Tennessee." - I don't understand this phrase (after which is referring to what?)
"while he was in middle school" - remove while
That was rephrased to "Clough also met his future wife, Anne Olivia Robinson, during this time frame" Disavian (talk) 18:03, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
The following two sentences are disconnected and too short
"The faculty encouraged him to earn a graduate degree, and he received his master's in 1965.[7]" - also disconnected
It is now: "However, the faculty encouraged him to pursue a graduate degree, so he continued his education and received his master's in 1965." Disavian (talk) 18:07, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
"and his mother died in " - remove "died"?
It is now: "During this time, both of Clough's parents died; his father in 1988 and his mother in 1994." Disavian (talk) 18:07, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
Will continue later--Tomcat (7) 22:17, 20 January 2013 (UTC)
  I have addressed several of the issues described above, in addition to edits previously made by User:Elsceetaria. I will continue to help with this process until all issues have been addressed. Mistercontributer (talk) 03:23, 23 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Link Virginia Tech just to Virginia Tech
When I expanded the article, Virginia Tech was a redirect to the longer name. Apparently, that is no longer the case. Disavian (talk) 01:32, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
And delink the second mention
I fixed the links to Virginia Tech. Disavian (talk) 01:38, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
In which way was the reorganization of the institute controversial?
"This decision was widely criticized" - so odd. Why was it criticized?--Tomcat (7) 13:11, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
The reorganization is covered in more detail at History of Georgia Tech#Restructuring controversy, I have a lot of references that discuss it in detail. tl;dr: "Crecine announced the changes without asking for input, and consequently many faculty members disliked him for his top-down management style" Disavian (talk) 01:38, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
  Source review - spotchecks not done 
 Print publications should be italicized
I believe that I have fixed the places where they were not. Disavian (talk) 18:40, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
What makes FindAGrave a high-quality reliable source?
I typically avoid FindAGrave as well, but used it to cite his parents' death dates as 1) that information is not contained in any other source I could find 2) it is noncontroversial information 3) a picture of the grave is included. So yes, I would prefer another source, but that seems like reasonably important uncontroversial information to me. Definitely a grey area as far as RS goes, though. I wouldn't be opposed to commenting out that sentence, but I wouldn't be happy about it. Disavian (talk) 18:44, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
FN27, 58: publisher?
Those two refs have been fixed. Disavian (talk) 18:40, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
Don't duplicate cited sources in External links. Nikkimaria (talk) 17:36, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Re: not duplicating cited sources, I compare the two external links to the official links in Barack Obama.
  Addressed several more issues. If possible, please provide feedback regarding changes made so far. Thanks Mistercontributer (talk) 00:59, 25 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Support A great article from an underrepresented area. Regards.--Tomcat (7) 10:33, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): Curly Turkey (gobble) 21:36, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article because I think it is a comprehensive article on the Chocoloate Lady this War of 1812 heroine, and an important part of early Canadian mythology. 
 Ideally, I'd like to see it as Today's Featured Article on 22 June 2013, which is the 200th anniversary of her famous walk through enemy-controlled territory to inform the British of an impending American attack. Curly Turkey (gobble) 21:36, 17 January 2013 (UTC) 
 [edit] Review by Rschen7754 
 This is my first full review of a non-road FAC, so I won't be supporting or opposing until others review. 
 fought on the side of the American revolutionaries during the War. - phrased a bit awkwardly, someone who isn't familiar with American history might not understand
last paragraph of lead - two sentences starting with "She" right next to each other
Section 2 is very short. Meanwhile, section 1 has a lot of subsections.
It is. I've found few details describing her, and couldn't think of a satisfying way to work the info into another section. Curly Turkey (gobble) 12:30, 18 January 2013 (UTC)
More later. --Rschen7754 09:26, 18 January 2013 (UTC)
Holding until the lead is figured out. --Rschen7754 06:19, 20 January 2013 (UTC)
 Personal history
 He descended from Richard Ingersoll, - was descended?
where he settled on a small piece of land with a house on it on the Housatonic River. - the two "on"s so close to each other should be adjusted.
Thomas's contract was cancelled, either because road construction was not completed on time or because he had not brought in the requisite number of settlers. - seems uncertain.
Reworded. Leavy 2012 says it was because the roads weren't finished; Mackenzie 1977 (which I don't have access to) apparently claimed it was because of the number of settlers. Reworded to: "Thomas's contract was cancelled for not having fulfilled all the details of the conditions". Curly Turkey (gobble) 02:20, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
"all the details of the conditions" seems a bit wordy. --Rschen7754 08:56, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
1.2 - second and third paragraphs could be merged.
I'm not sure. It seems like a jarring transition in mid-paragraph. Curly Turkey (gobble) 08:24, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
Was Secord promised the keys? It doesn't seem clear.
Maitland promised her the keys in 1827, but Colborne had become Lieutenant Governor by 1831 (when the monumetn opened) and didn't follow through on Maitland's promise. Curly Turkey (gobble) 08:24, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
Would you mind clarifying this in the article? --Rschen7754 08:56, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
I've changed the last sentence to "Despite her pleas, Secord did not receive the keys to the monument." Curly Turkey (gobble) 10:43, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 Memory and legend
 I still think it should be merged somewhere, but won't oppose over it.
I'll think over a way to handle this. Curly Turkey (gobble) 08:24, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
Merged. I've merged the "Personal description" and "Legend" sections into a "Memory and legend" section". Curly Turkey (gobble) 00:19, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
According to biographer Peggy Dymond Leavey, her many grandchildren enjoyed hearing their grandmother tell stories of her early life,[44] and her Anglican,[56] faith increased with age.[57] - seems like a stray comma after Anglican
More later. --Rschen7754 08:11, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
"In the early 1920s, historians suggested that Native scouts" - what are Native scouts? --Rschen7754 08:56, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Reworded. That would be scouts sent by the Mohawks. Curly Turkey (gobble) 10:43, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 Support I'm not qualified to comment on the comprehensiveness, but otherwise the article meets the standard. --Rschen7754 18:57, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 [edit] Review by Dank 
 Comments. As always, feel free to revert my copyediting. Please check the edit summaries. - Dank (push to talk) 
 Hi Curly, thanks for bringing this to FAC. The lead needs to be longer; about twice as long would do it, as long as it does a good job summarizing the article. I'll be back with more a little later. - Dank (push to talk) 18:55, 19 January 2013 (UTC)
Oh, dear. Oh, deary, deary, dear. Natty10000 doesn't seem to agree, as s/he has gutted the lead not just once (18 January), but twice (19 January) since I've submitted this article for FAC. Curly Turkey (gobble) 21:58, 19 January 2013 (UTC)
Okay, don't do anything with it yet, I'll go ask Natty what's up. - Dank (push to talk) 22:08, 19 January 2013 (UTC)
I think we can compromise here; I agree that it has a bit more detail than it needs, and I'll trim a bit. See what you think. - Dank (push to talk) 22:37, 19 January 2013 (UTC)
I certainly don't have any problem with a trimming, but cutting out the info about the chocolate company is a big mistake. It can hardly be understated how strongly Canadians associated her name with chocolates, even amongst those familiar with the historical Secord. The first thing most Canadians think of when you mention her name is chocolates. In fact, I first visited the article myself to find out when she founded "her" chocolate company. I think it's important to emphasize they she is both unrelated to the chocolate company, and that her name is strongly associated with the chocolate company amongst Canadians. Otherwise, Canadians (who will almost certainly be the vast majority of readers) will be confused as to her relation with the company (as I was).
I didn't cut the information out of the article, I just reduced the bit in the lead to "Laura Secord Chocolates are named for her." Change it however you want ... but if it feels too much like "product placement", then I'll stop here. - Dank (push to talk) 00:45, 20 January 2013 (UTC)
I do undertand the "product placement" concerns, but please keep in mind that a quite significant number (quite likely a majority) of Canadian readers who come to this article will be curious about her realtion to the chocolate company. "Laura Secord Chocolates are named after her" only raises more questions than it answers. The fact that the fame of the chocolate company far overshadows Secord's own has more than one reference in the article, and I'm sure I could come up with more with little effort.
How about something like this? —
Before: "On the centennial of her walk, businessman Frank Patrick O'Connor named Laura Secord Chocolates in her honour; it became the most successful candy retailer in Canada, and though the historical Secord and her family had no relation to it, amongst Canadians her name is most often associated with the candy company."
After: "Though the historical Secord and her family had no relation to it, most Canadians associate her name with the Laura Secord Chocolates company, which was named in her honour on the centennial of her walk."
I'm not really sure it's a good idea to leave out the "Canada's most successful candy retailer"; while I sympathise with the "product placement" concern, it does give context for non-Canadian readers—as in: why would Canadians associate her name with a candy company, and even if they do, why does it have to be in the lead?
If you're going to do more more trimming to the lead, there's one more detail I think is important not to lose: that her father fought on the American side in the Revolutionary war. Before I atrarted editing it, the article claimed Thomas Ingersoll was a United Empire Loyalist (uncited, of course). It's a belief held by (or assumed) a certain number of Canadians, and I think it's important to disabuse readers of that notion. Curly Turkey (gobble) 23:10, 19 January 2013 (UTC)
Sure, I'm fine with those changes. - Dank (push to talk) 01:04, 20 January 2013 (UTC)
I would make "(where she stopped at the home of her half-brother Charles, who was ill in bed)" a note; I think it's a bit tangential and interrupts the flow of that sentence. - Dank (push to talk) 00:18, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
The two instances of " are said to " in the personal description section leave me a little skeptical ... who said? - Dank (push to talk) 00:28, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
Support on prose per standard disclaimer. These are my edits. - Dank (push to talk) 01:10, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
 [edit] Review by Nikkimaria 
 Sources and images - spotchecks not done. Disclaimer: have previously edited the article 
 FN59, 61, 73: page(s)?
59: Unfortunately, I don't have access to the book, and I'm in Japan. I'll see if I can find an interested Canadian who can pop over to their local library and hunt it down. Curly Turkey (gobble) 01:28, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
Done. The helpful Moxy was very prompt in turning up a page reference for this one. Curly Turkey (gobble) 03:27, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
61: I don't have access to this one, but it is available on JSTOR. I'll see if I can find some kind soul to track down the page numbers. Curly Turkey (gobble) 01:28, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
Removed. Rjensen has access to the article, and gave me page refs, but has convinced me the information is really not that important. I've removed the two lines. Curly Turkey (gobble) 01:43, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
73: Removed. I don't have access to this book. The information was trivial, so I've deleted it. Curly Turkey (gobble) 01:28, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
FN87: page formatting
Carstens: given that this is published by a print-on-demand company, what makes it a high-quality reliable source?
Berry: work?
File:Laura_Secord_warns_Fitzgibbons,_1813.jpg: is this being claimed as Crown copyright?
According to Library and Archives Canada: "No restrictions on use for reproductions or publication." and "Copyright: expired; Restrictions on use: nil" Nothing about the crown, or the conditions of the painting's creation. Without evidence to the contrary, I would assume that means the copyright was Lorne's. It was "[a]cquired by Dr. Arthur Doughty, Dominion Archivist, probably through a commission, before 1931", but creation is stated to be c. 1920. Curly Turkey (gobble) 01:28, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
File:Brock's_Monument.jpg: per the Canadian tag, need to mention which of its reasons applies. Also, author is listed as Durer, which is not correct
File:Mrs_James_Secord.jpg needs US PD tag. Nikkimaria (talk) 23:24, 20 January 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): Meetthefeebles (talk) 19:19, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
  I've spent about six months working on this article, which describes the host venue of the 2013 European Team Championships. It started as a stub, was promoted to GA in November 2012, was peer reviewed by Giants2008 in December 2012 and was then kindly given a once over for content and prose by Sarastro1 over the Christmas holidays (recorded for posterity on the article talk page). Hopefully it is now ready for a crack at FAC. I will be available to respond to comments and suggestions. Meetthefeebles (talk) 19:19, 17 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Comments Hi there. This is looking pretty good so far. Prose is largely up to snuff and I've started going through some of the references. There are some issues that need to be addressed (though nothing fatal to the article's FAC, at least upon my first read-through). There are the occasional jargon/unfamiliar reader concerns (ex. in the lead Gateshead F.C. is mentioned without cluing people to what sport they play; same deal with the 3,000m), colloquialisms ("slated"), and redundancies ("The report also noted concerns that the original centrepiece of the proposed village, the ice rink, may have been deterring investors and that a proposal to redevelop land at the Stadium of Light in Sunderland, which also proposed an ice rink as a centrepiece, was detracting from what councillors had hoped to be a unique feature of the proposed village."). The article should try to refrain from citing primary sources as much as possible--this mainly means the sports team websites. Also, much of the Transport section strikes me as problematic, as you are pretty much repeating map directions and primary source info from the Metro website. 
 Some other items I wanted to bring up: 
 The last sentences of the History and Development section seem to go off the rails a bit, becoming nonsensical. The last sentence even ends on a comma.
 
I've corrected the grammar problem and slightly reworded to give a bit more cohesion I think. Meetthefeebles (talk) 13:57, 18 January 2013 (UTC)
 Are concert performances a rarity at the venue? If not, I wonder why single out these particular performances.
 
Yes, they are indeed, especially since the opening of the Metro Radio Arena just accross the river in 1995. I can't think of any concerts held there at all since around that time (and I live in Gateshead). Meetthefeebles (talk) 13:57, 18 January 2013 (UTC)
 In the sentence that starts "While these did not have an immediate positive impact..." what is "these" referring to?
 
I've reworded slightly to give better context. Meetthefeebles (talk) 14:00, 18 January 2013 (UTC)
 What makes bluesqfootball.com and footballgroundguide.com reliable sources?
 
The Blue Square site is the official site of the league; It is actually called the 'Blue Square Premier Division' but obviously this is not included in the article. The other one is perhaps not reliable (I'm not sure) so I have replaced with a link to a BBC report. Meetthefeebles (talk)
 Is there a proper criteria to define "world class" athletes?
 
This one came up in PR - I thought I'd taken these out. It is now gone. Meetthefeebles (talk) 14:00, 18 January 2013 (UTC)
 When inline citing The Brewing Grade Review, since there's no author listed type out the full title instead of writing an acronym, and place the title in italics.
 
Wasn't sure how to deal with that one. It has been changed as suggested. Meetthefeebles (talk) 13:57, 18 January 2013 (UTC)
 "Journey time by car from Gateshead town centre is approximately five minutes and a further five minutes travel from Newcastle upon Tyne.[110]" This link does not work for me. Also, if you are making calculations instead of citing something that is plainly said, that skirts on original research.
 
The link didn't work for me, either, so I've added a new one. It is a calculation of sorts; the link is to a bus timetable. Is there a better source that might just stipulate this? If not, I'll just take it out if necessary. Meetthefeebles (talk) 13:57, 18 January 2013 (UTC)
  I'll check back in on this FAC and will add further comments as I review the article further. In any event, good luck, and I hope everything will be taken care of in due course. WesleyDodds (talk) 12:39, 18 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Thanks for taking the time to read and leave comments. I've making some small changes as suggested. Meetthefeebles (talk) 14:00, 18 January 2013 (UTC)
 Support – As stated in the nomination, I contributed suggestions for the article at peer review; in addition, I did some copy-editing back then, and tweaked a few things before coming here. My impression back then was that the article would have a strong chance at passing FAC with additional copy-editing, which has been done by Sarastro. My only additional comment is that the note in the bibliography on abbreviations has no purpose now, since the abbreviations were removed after Wesley's review. Otherwise, I think that the article meets the FA criteria, and see no reason to withhold support as I have faith that the note will be fixed prompted. Giants2008 (Talk) 01:27, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Thank you for the support and for the excellent work at peer review which improved the article. I have removed the superfluous bibliography note. Meetthefeebles (talk) 10:26, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 Support Comments on prose and comprehensiveness. I had a squiz at this some time ago, but got distracted and forgot about it (as is the way of things). Anyway, here we are and I'll take another squiz and jot queries below..... Casliber (talk · contribs) 02:09, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
 
Since then is has been extensively re-developed, most notably in the early 1970s, 2006 and 2010. - (a) I presume the "is" should be an "it", and (b) is "notably" the right adverb? Do you mean "extensively"? (I wouldn't have thought of renovations as famous....)
 
Gateshead football club have played their home games at the stadium since their modern inception in 1974. - "modern inception" sounds funny to me ...."modern incarnation" or "reformation" or ...?
 
However, there are plans to vacate the site when their own purpose-built ground is built. - subjects of two segments ("plans" and "their own...") don't gell - better would be However, the club will vacate the site when their own purpose-built ground is built.
 
a former schoolteacher turned world-class athlete - I'd drop "world-class" as a bit puffy.
 
the venue was renamed the "Gateshead International Stadium". - quotes unnecessary here.
 
and the venues's profile was further raised in the summer of 1983 - too many s's?
  Looking good otherwise. Casliber (talk · contribs) 02:51, 5 February 2013 (UTC) 
 
Thanks for taking the time to look and comment - 'tis always appreciated. I've made some small amendments per your suggestions (though I think this nomination looks somewhat doomed to failure through lack of interest). Meetthefeebles (talk) 18:33, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
  Comment: regarding File:Gateshead_harriers_logo_on_black_background.png, are you sure this is a free image? The given licensing info doesn't seem to make sense. Nikkimaria (talk) 13:30, 8 February 2013 (UTC) 
 
I think it is okay. I must confess that I didn't upload or even add this image - I logged into Wiki one day and someone had added it to the article... Meetthefeebles (talk) 13:48, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): Till 08:36, 16 January 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article because... I believe that it meets the FA criteria. It is both well-written and comprehensive in its coverage, and the story of how the song came about is very interesting. The first nomination was closed because nobody commented on it, and I withdrew the second nomination so the whole article could be redone. Till 08:36, 16 January 2013 (UTC) 
 [edit] Review by Wikipedian Penguin 
 Oppose Initial comments – the content seems satisfactory and the major information is there. But with regard to prose, it needs work. Choice of words appears problematic in some instances ("crush" is informal writing, and any reason "utilises" is used instead of "uses"?), and why link "teasing", the article for which does not disambiguate the meaning of the word in that context. Do you mean "seducing" (I haven't seen the video)? —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 00:19, 17 January 2013 (UTC) 
 When I rewrote the section for a second time, I used 'crush' instead of limerence. Should I add that back instead? Also, I changed 'utilise'. As for teasing, I don't feel comfortable in writing 'seducing' instead because that is more persuading somebody to engage in sexual acts. I unlinked it anyway. Till 02:05, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
I'm thinking "was infatuated with", but that may give the wrong meaning and sounds, shall I say, fancy. For "teasing", I consider "seducing" and "flirting with" as alternatives but if you have something else, that's good; "teasing" is far too ambiguous here. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 20:10, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
Changed "teasing" to "flirting". Till 07:33, 18 January 2013 (UTC)
  In good conscience, I do not think the article is ready as a potential featured article yet. Work needs to be done throughout. The prose seems a little rushed and reads awkward in places. It needs to be tightened and be more cohesive. 
 "It was composed by Dallas Austin in collaboration with the Sugababes, after group member Keisha Buchanan developed a crush on another artist who collaborated with Austin." – why not just "...Dallas Austin and the Sugababes..."? There is no need for the added words in this context.
"...compositionally, it makes use of various computer and electronic effects." – what is the difference between the two?
This is something I see pop up in a lot of pop music articles and I don't see it as necessary: you have "music critics" written. Why should the type of critic be noted in a music article? Would a film or video game critic review a pop song?
"also" is a needless word in these instances: "Some critics also named it one of best pop singles of the 2000s. The song attained worldwide success and became one of the Sugababes' most successful singles"; "It was also parodied by firefighers in Staffordshire, England."
I don't mind this one too much, but a better grammatical construction would be appreciated here: "It features the Sugababes flirting with three men in an elevator."
"numerous" – " The Sugababes have performed the song at numerous festivals and events such as Oxegen 2008 and the V Festival 2008." – that's a bit of a hyperbole.
There is more redundancy here: "They subsequently composed five tracks for the album, one of which was 'Push the Button'." – why "subsequently"? It's obvious. Likewise, "for the album".
The sentence immediately after begins with "Push the Button"... Not pleasant to read.
{{cquote}} is not used in lieu of block quotations. It is used for pull quotes that are already given in the article. Stick to {{quote}} or the &lt;blockquote&gt; tags.
"Austin produced the song, while Rick Shepphard completed the engineering process." – just "...engineered it".
That last paragraph in the development and concept section needs reordering. Typically, recording is done before mixing and engineering.
"...the tempo of the song moves at a fast-paced 126 beats per minute" – subjective "fast-paced".
A few redundancies here: "while Joe Muggs of The Daily Telegraph noted that Austin's production of the song combines &lt;both electropop and American R&amp;B together." – first "both" is needless here and never say "combine ... together".
Content-wise, the composition section feels weak. We are given info about the genre, and musical technicalities, but there isn't enough on things like song structure and lyrical analysis, which I'd expect on an article about a major hit. The song was released over seven years ago; have you considered print sources?
Again, why "first" and "for release as" in, "'Push the Button' was first announced for release as the lead single from Taller in More Ways in August 2005."
Still there are reundancies: "According to group member Heidi Range, the song was not intended to be the lead single, and it was the last track to be completed for the album."
Overlinking: why link "music critics"?
First paragraph in Release and reception does not have a smooth flow to it. For example, this is very repetitive: "'Push the Button' was released as a CD single and digital download on 26 September 2005.[14][15] The tracks on the CD single and digital download include the single release of 'Push the Button'..."
  That's where I stopped. Till, it would be of your best interest to find a good uninvolved writer to give this article a thorough independent copy edit from top to bottom. And have a look at print sources that can strengthen the article's content and comprehensiveness. With a good amount of collaborative effort, this article can succeed. But right now, it is unfortunately not there yet. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 15:09, 20 January 2013 (UTC) 
 
Thanks for taking time to give feedback. For the meantime, I have fixed these issues. Also, I added a source to support the 'fast-paced' claim. Till 02:41, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
You're welcome. I am open to striking out my oppose when I think it is no longer appropriate. Cheers. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 10:23, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
Btw. How do I find information on the song structure? I have searched everywhere online and on Google books and found nothing. Till 08:48, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
Google Books usually doesn't have everything. There are bookstores, e-books and libraries too. But you're more likely to find good information from the 90s, which is unfortunate because the composition section is a little underwhelming. But I only ask of you what's possible to do. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 02:22, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
 
For guitar-based songs, I typically check print magazines like Guitar World,Musician, and the like, who tend to delve into the musical/compositional side of things a lot. For a "non-rockist" pop song, it can be trickier; at most a web publication like Sound On Sound might talk about the production and how elements of the song are arranged. It's very possible you might end up with little information about the song's composition (I doubt you'll end up with a Composition section that looks like the one in "Paranoid Android"), but make all efforts to find any relevant information that might exist--as WikiPenguin said, that involves scouring print resources. Also, I'd recommend refraining from citing the sheet music, which is akin to citing the screenplay of a film; commentary on what's notable in a song should be drawn from independent, secondary sources. Refrain from citing album reviews for factual information about musical structure and composition, as by their nature reviews are opinion pieces. WesleyDodds (talk) 04:31, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Thanks for this information, although Sound on Sound has nothing. Till 08:04, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
 Heads up: no commas after dmy date formats, please. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 02:18, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
There aren't any but thanks Till 11:58, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
See my edits. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 12:05, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
Oh I didn't know it applied to that as well, I thought you meant 1 January, 2000. Btw, I went to the library and found nothing on this song. Till 12:45, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
That's unfortunate. I think we have a case similar to that of Rehab (Rihanna song): they have the major information, but they don't go into enough detail. "Rehab" is an FA, and one I supported because it is as comprehensive as can be, and it is well presented. So since we've as much information as we can have, the presentation is the one chance we have to make this article shine as "one of Wikipedia's best". That comes with good organization, flow and language. That is to say we should work towards a thorough copy edit. Also, the sound sample in this article does not seem very useful. What value does it have for enhancing the reader's understanding of the article? —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 13:27, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
Thanks Penguin. I'm still looking for any online sources I may have missed. The sample shows the computer effects used in the song. Btw, do you know where I could fit information about a cover? Till 01:18, 3 February 2013 (UTC)
You're welcome. I hope you find something. You'll need a better rationale to keep the sample than just the use of computer effects. Include the Allmusic and Daily Telegraph observations in the caption. Otherwise, you're better off removing it. The cover can either go into the reception section or the pop culture section. The latter works well in that it will help round off the article nicely. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 01:29, 3 February 2013 (UTC)
I have expanded the composition section to the best of my ability, and fixed the rationale for the sample. Till 10:38, 3 February 2013 (UTC)
Thanks, I'll take a look soon. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 00:52, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
Okay thanks Till 23:39, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
  Revisit 
 Lead
Lead sentence says just "Sugababes", while following instances use "the Sugababes". I'd probably tweak this sentence to clarify.
"It was composed by Dallas Austin and the Sugababes, and was inspired by a crush that group member Keisha Buchanan developed on another artist."—probably "...was inspired by an infatuation that group member Keisha Buchanan developed with another artist."
"'Push the Button' is a pop and electropop song with elements of electronic and R&amp;B."—some redundancy here. Electropop is just a subgenre of pop and electronic. Essentially, it's an electropop song with elements of R&amp;B.
Likewise, there is redundancy in the infobox too.
"It makes use of various computer effects, and is lyrically about a woman's sexual frustration of being unnoticed by a man."—just "uses". In most circumstances, avoid expressions such as "make use of", "make plans to", etcetera, when these can be expressed with one verb.
Reword so that we don't have two consecutive paragraphs beginning with the title of the song.
"...who praised the conception as clever, as well its production and sound."—clunky.
"The song attained worldwide success and became one of the Sugababes' most successful singles."—does not read nicely owing to the repetition.
"It features the Sugababes flirting with three men in an elevator. The Sugababes have performed the song at festivals and events such as Oxegen 2008 and the V Festival 2008."—also repetitive. Why not "the group", instead, in the second sentence?
More to come later on. But that work is still needed to be done is evident. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 21:42, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
Fixed these issues Till 02:01, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
One more left, the first point. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 08:41, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
Because the name of the group is 'Sugababes', ie. the name of this specific girl group is 'Sugababes', but they are "the Sugababes", as without 'the' it sounds like an adjective Till 08:48, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
 Background
"... developed an infatuation on another artist who was also collaborating with Austin."—remove "also" since we have "another".
"Austin wrote five tracks on the album..."—"for the album", not on.
"Austin gave advice to Buchanan about the misunderstanding between her and the artist, and developed the idea of the man to 'push that button' or she would eventually move on."—just a tad awkward-sounding. Perhaps "advised"?
 Composition
"...with a tempo of a fast-paced 126..." → "...with a fast-paced tempo of 126..."
"The production of "Push the Button" consists of various computer beats and electronic effects."—remove "of 'Push the Button'".
"Joe Macare of Stylus Magazine described Buena's delivery of the lyric 'my sexy ass' as "carefree', and noted that the lyrics adapt an 'idiosyncratic approach"' to the English language.[14] Musically, "Push the Button" received comparisons to the sound of pop group Abba."—no need to italicize "my sexy ass".
More to come. I think we can get through the sections quickly. The composition section is also looking better. Good research. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 09:09, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
Thanks! Fixed these issues for the meantime Till 09:21, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
 Release and reception
"It was released as a CD single and digital download on 26 September 2005. Both release formats also contain a B-side titled 'Favourite Song'..."—the sentences can be merged by removing needless repetition: "It was released as a CD single and digital download on 26 September 2005 with a B-side titled 'Favourite Song'..."
"An extended play of 'Push the Button' was also released, which includes..."&amp;mdahs;erroneous grammar and redundancy. You have the title of the song twice in that sentence, so "of 'Push the Button'" can be removed. "Also" can be removed as well. And when you have "which", the noun that it refers to should directly precede it. Otherwise, write "including".
"... composed by the Sugababes, Cathy Dennis, and Guy Sigsworth."—use "written" here to avoid repetition.
I think the prose in the first paragraph should be varied more. Repetitive prose seems to be an issue in the article and needs to be dealt with. Sentence structures are far too similar. Be a little more creative with the wording (e.g. "Island Records released an extended play", or something like that).
"Linda McGee from RTÉ.ie applauded the song's beat and melody, and suggested that it was the best track on the album."—"suggested" doesn't seem like the best word to use. Maybe "wrote" or something similarly simple.
There's more repetitive prose here. Every sentence begins in the second paragraph begins with "[Reporter] of [magazine]". It's almost as proseliny in the third paragraph.
"Alexis Petridis of The Guardian described the melody of 'Push the Button' as 'sweet and addictive as Smarties'."—well of course it's the melody of "PTB"; what other song would it be? There're many times you write "of 'Push the Button'" when all the words are doing is just fluffing up the prose.
I think Observer Music Monthly should be italicized.
More to come. This section needs some copy editing I'm afraid. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 20:32, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
Did everything except for changing "composed". Allmusic says the writers &amp; producers and I can't tell who did what, whereas 'composed' can refer to both. Till 05:18, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
Better, but the general strcture is all too repetitive. Try different ways to open sentences (eg. "according to" and use transitions (eg. "likewise") and play around; experiment with variation. As for "composed", we have to do something about the two side-by-side sentences that end the same way. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 23:25, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
Did more copyediting Till 23:42, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
Still need more work. For example, the copy edit introduced redundancy: "Comparing the song to those performed by Abba" (the subsequent quotation makes this obvious). It's often hard to copy edit sections like these, but repetitive prose = ungainly reading. Let me have a go if you don't mind. Thanks, —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 17:45, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
Okay thanks. Till 00:26, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 Commercial performance
"It became the Sugababes' fourth single to reached number one in the UK."
Do not capitalize certifications.
"'Push the Button' entered the Irish Singles Chart at number two, and peaked at number one the next week for three consecutive weeks."—a date here to get an idea of when this happened would be nice. Also, trim the prose: "...and was number one the next three weeks."
"...and became the Sugababes' best-performing single in Austria."&amp;mdsah;vague. Per source it's the highest-charting single perhaps?
The prose here is repetitive too. ("peaked at"..."peaked at"...)
"It was Germany's 86th most successful single of the 2000s decade."—"decade" not necessary.
"'Push the Button' debuted at number 24 on the Australian Singles Chart for the issue dated 30 October 2005."—"in" the issue, not "for".
There's a MOS:NUM problem here. Chart positions are being formatted as both numbers and words; as per the exceptions to the 9+ rule of thumb, you must do either one.
You have five of the eight certifications mentioned in this section. This makes me wonder whether a table is even necessary and why wouldn't you just write out all the certification information in the prose. No sense repeating information. At the most, mention the two highest certifications in the prose, and leave the rest for the table. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 11:42, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
Fixed everything, except for the number issue. Do you want me to change '24' to 'twenty-four'? Till 12:16, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
That, or write them all out as numerals. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 12:21, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
Changed '24' to twenty-four Till 12:24, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
How does ref 41 support that "PTB" was their highest-charting single in Austria? Also, it's obvious. There isn't a position higher than no. 1. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 16:16, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
I had written 'best-performing' until you told me to change it, but it's fine...I removed it Till 22:55, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
And this—"It was the group's first number-one single in New Zealand."
I'm clueless as to what the problem here is, sorry Till 07:42, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
 Music video
"The music video for 'Push the Button' was directed by American director Matthew Rolston, who previously collaborated with the Sugababes on the videos for their singles 'Hole in the Head' and 'In the Middle'."—awkward tense. Subsititute "previously" for "had".
"It was filmed in Shepherd's Bush, London during July 2005."—insert a comma after "London".
"Several models and dancers auditioned to appear in the video, and were selected based on their dancing talent."—even models were chosen based on dancing talent?
"Buena described it as a 'really cheeky video', while Buchanan expressed her desire for it to be more suggestive."—this lacks logical flow and has poor connection. Also, it's wordy. Surely by "expressed her desire for", you mean "wanted".
"Some clips were removed from the final product due to their sexual content."—"due to" is adjectival. The removal of the clips was "due to" the sexual content, but they were removed "owing to" or "because of" it.
"The video features Range, Buchanan and Buena on separate floors of an elevator."—you might not even need this sentence since it's explained in the following sentences.
I may be wrong, but do they use "elevator" in the UK?
"Three different men separately enter the lift and are taken to three different floors, one for each of the group's members."—repetitive. Try something like "Three men separately enter the lift and are each taken to a different floor, where they meet a member of the Sugababes."
"The first man, described by Buena as 'Mr Shy Guy', arrives on the floor where Range is, in which they begin flirting with each other."—ungrammatical. "and they begin" would work.
"Meanwhile the second man, 'Mr Too Cool', enters the lift and is taken to the floor where Buchanan is. Buchanan is shown flirting and dancing with him. The third man, known as 'Mr Perfect', enters the lift with an umbrella, and arrives on Buena's floor."—remove "described as" and "known as" (redundancy).
"her man" does not sound like an encyclopedic writing style.
"Daily Mirror's Gavin Martin wrote that the Sugababes..."—"they" would be good pronoun referencing here. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 01:59, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
I fixed these issues, except for the 'models and dancers' one—the source says that both were in it. However, I wrote it wrong, because the source doesn't say that several ones auditioned, it just says that the guys who were in the video are models and dancers. Till 07:19, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Comment(s) 
 The prose seems satisfactory according to me. My main concern here is the formatting of references. You should be able to differentiate between {{cite news}} and {{cite web}}. The former is used for published newspapers while the latter is used for online as well as published magazines and other websites. This is by far the simplest way I can explain this to you and I sincerely hope it helps. Jivesh1205 (Talk) 18:17, 19 January 2013 (UTC)
Is Legacy the appropriate word to use for titling this section? I do not think this song has very much of a legacy to be honest. Jivesh1205 (Talk) 18:28, 19 January 2013 (UTC)
 
I was under the impression that "cite news" is only for news articles. Also, I renamed the section to 'Impact'. Till 02:17, 20 January 2013 (UTC)
Hmmm, what about Recognition? Impact and Legacy are two words that should be used carefully. Jivesh1205 (Talk) 04:48, 20 January 2013 (UTC)
Changed. Also, I fixed the references. Till 11:04, 20 January 2013 (UTC)
FYI: you could always avoid the cite template mix-ups by forgoing them completely. That's what I do these days. WesleyDodds (talk) 12:16, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
  ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘ Interesting approach. Till 08:48, 22 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Really? With all the respect I owe to you, I do not think that's a very recommendable thing to do. Jivesh1205 (Talk) 16:37, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
Do note that all sorts of reference styles are accepted on Wikipedia, but WP:CITEVAR says not to change an established ref style without consensus. So if Till wants to forgo using cite templates on further articles, they are perfectly able to do so. But if the ref style is to be changed for this article, it's probably not the best idea at this stage--but it can be done. WesleyDodds (talk) 02:09, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Okay. Do what pleases you. Jivesh1205 (Talk) 05:04, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
  ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘ Till, what bothers me next about this article is its composition section. Can it be expanded if possible? Jivesh1205 (Talk) 05:07, 23 January 2013 (UTC) 
 
I have looked everywhere for sources to expand this section but still nothing was found. I guess I will have to make a trip to the library. Till 08:04, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
I went to the library but they didn't have anything. Perhaps I haven't... used the sources to their full potential? Till 08:56, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
That's a possibility. :) Jivesh1205 (Talk) 17:04, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
Hey, I expanded the composition and lyrics section. Till 10:47, 3 February 2013 (UTC)
  Brianboulton comments: I did a partial prose review at the August 2012 FAC. I think the prose is now considerably improved; I have made a couple of minor edits, and suggest you consider a few more: 
 At present, too many sentences begin with "'Push the Button'...", sometimes successively. You should try to vary this more.
Some whole sentences are rather repetitiously worded. For example, " 'Push the Button' debuted at number two on the Irish Singles Chart and peaked at number one the following week, becoming the group's first single to top the chart in Ireland" is followed soon after by "'Push the Button' debuted at number one on the Austrian Singles Chart and held the position for five consecutive weeks, becoming the Sugababes' best-performing single in Austria" and then "'Push the Button' debuted at number five on the German Singles Chart and peaked at number two three weeks later". Again, more variation in the prose would improve readability.
Delete the word "Synoptically". It's usually a bad idea to begin sentences with adverbs, and this is no exception. The section makes perfect sense without it.
  Other than these suggestions, I can't see a great deal wrong with the prose. Editors with better knowledge of popular music than mine will have to decide whether the content is adequate and comprehensive, and I'll keep an eye on the review to see how things develop in that direction. Maybe the other reviewers could summarise, bearing in mind your responses so far, what they think is still lacking in the article? Brianboulton (talk) 00:20, 7 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Thanks. Fixed these issues pointed out. Reviewers said the composition section was too short but I have since expanded it, they are yet to comment on that Till 02:01, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
At a quick glance the article seems to have greatly improved with regards to comprehensiveness and the composition section seems adequate for an FA. I'll read it more thoroughly when I review the section. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 08:43, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): Found5dollar (talk) 05:56, 16 January 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article because I have been working on Sacred Cod since 2009,have gotten it thought GA, and I feel as though it is of FA quality. This is my first FAC I have attempted by myself, and I think it could make a great TFA for April 1.--Found5dollar (talk) 05:56, 16 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Comment Good luck with your first FAC. I hope it's successful and the first of many. On the substance, I was very surprised that I couldn't find any mention in the article of why it's called "Sacred". This seems to be a major oversight (unless it's just my error!) and needs to be addressed, even if it's just a sourced comment that says we don't know why it's called that. --Dweller (talk) 16:40, 16 January 2013 (UTC)
 
You are right. that is a topic I never even looked into and that is a blatant mistake. I will add some information on the term "sacred" later today.--Found5dollar (talk) 14:08, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
I added a few paragraphs about the etymology in the "background" section.--Found5dollar (talk) 21:12, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
 Comment The title is in italics. Should the term Sacred Cod be in italics throughout the article? If not, the title should be unitalicized. Designate (talk) 22:17, 20 January 2013 (UTC)
I think it is in italics because of the infobox. I used infobox:artwork ans i think it does that to article titles. I do not believe that is should be in italics as no source italicizes the name and it is more of a ceremonial name than an official one (see the section about the etymology i recently added). I do not know how to fix the italicization of the title.--Found5dollar (talk) 13:26, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
As a piece of sculpture, yes, the title should be in italics. See WP:ITALICTITLE which says, "Use italics when italics would be used in running text; for example, taxonomic names, the names of ships, the titles of books, films, and other creative works, and foreign phrases are italicized both in ordinary text and in article titles." (emphasis mine) Imzadi 1979 → 07:26, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 Comment I suggest removing the infobox because not only it causes that italication problem, it serves no real porpose as we can find that information aleady in the lead.--Tomcat (7) 22:47, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
good point. I have removed the info box but left the image.--Found5dollar (talk) 04:40, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
{{Infobox artifact}} could have been used to avoid the italics, but Tomcat's point about "serv[ing] no real purpose as we can find that information aleady in the lead" is not a valid reason to remove the infobox. Infoboxes are designed to be a quick summary of key points, even more so than the lead. Have only 30 seconds to scan the article for the gist of the subject? Read the infobox. Have a bit more than 30 seconds, read the lead. Have enough time to read the whole article, then... well, you get the point. See the talk page of this FAC for a sample infobox that would have retained all of the information and avoided the italics, however, as a sculpture, the article should be italicizing the name throughout. Imzadi 1979 → 07:26, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
So your suggestion is to re-add the infobox and italicize Sacred Cod throughout the article? I am just a little hesitant because the term "Sacred Cod of Massachusetts" is not it's official title, as it has none, and is almost more of a description people use to identify what is being talked about, than an artistic work's title.--Found5dollar (talk) 15:59, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
  Sources and images - spotchecks not done 
 File:Atlantic-cod-1.jpg: source link returns 404 error
 
I am working on find a different image who's source link is not broken.--Found5dollar (talk) 16:37, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
switched the image to one with better sourcing.--Found5dollar (talk) 16:54, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
 Be consistent in whether shortened citations include comma between author and date
 
 FN42: can I borrow your time machine? ;-)
 
Hahahaha. you sure can. Fixed the future.--Found5dollar (talk) 16:37, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
 FN11 returns 404 error. Nikkimaria (talk) 13:28, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
 
I think that is a google book as it works on my end. I tried using a different link.--Found5dollar (talk) 16:37, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
 [edit] Not ready for FA 
 This article falls well short of being Wikipedia's "very best work". 
 The writing is far from being "engaging, even brilliant, and of a professional standard" e.g.
fisherman devised a story that cod was the fish multiplied by Jesus during the miracle of the loaves and fishes. This false claim helped distinguish the two fishes' markings
Wood was incredibly scarce during the occupation
the theft plan continued without a hitch
While the Sacred Cod was dusted for fingerprints, and threats of the responsible parties being charged with "criminal trespass" and "attempted larceny", no one was ever charged for the actions of that weekend.
The Massachusetts State Police were called in to assist with the search for the cod. They went so far as to dredge the Charles River, in hopes of recovering the Sacred Cod. The authorities also found out that a member of the Lampoon staff was on board a plane heading to Newark, New Jersey. They searched Boston Airport and wired the authorities in Newark to search the plane the student was on when it arrived, but the cod was still not recovered (How about The State Police even dredged the Charles River and, learning that a Lampoon editor had flown to New Jersey, had the plane searched on landing.)
On April 27, the Crimson gave the staff of the Lampoon an ultimatum; if they would not give the Sacred Cod, by midnight, to them so the Crimson could take credit for its return, the Crimson would go public with its findings. After not receiving a reply from the Lampoon, the details of theft were printed in the next morning's edition of the Crimson.
 Irrelevant material is included for no apparent purpose e.g.
A fire in 1747 destroyed the Sacred Cod as well as state owned records, books and paintings, and large amounts of wines and other liquors belonging to private business who used the cellars of the building as storage. The entire interior of the building was destroyed, but the brick walls were left intact and used when the building was rebuilt. (Told the entire interior of the State House was destroyed, most readers' native shrewdness will tell them that records, books and paintings would have been lost. And what do the liquor and reuse of the walls have to do with anything?)
the Atlantic cod's conservation status was changed to Vulnerable species in 1996 and it is in danger of becoming commercially extinct.
 Inapproriate use of sources:
Stating flatly that, "To help determine the difference between cod and haddock, fisherman devised a story..." simply because a popular magazine recited this folkway is not appropriate. Anyway, the source doesn't even say that fishermen devised the story; it says the story about the origin of the markings is "part of New England mystique" and, separately, that fishermen distinguish cod from haddock via the markings.
The Museum of Hoaxes website, which is cited extensively, cannot (I believe) be considered a reliable source -- it appears to be just someone's fun website. Note that it asserts something ("Traditionally, the head of the cod points at whichever party is currently in power") which the article explicitly denies.
Celebrate Boston also appears to be simply a commercial website without obvious editorial oversight
Since the Crimson itself participated in the incident, its own report is essentially a primary (not secondary) source and can be used as a fact source only with great caution, especially since it clearly speaks with tongue partially in cheek.
 There's far too much "Background". All that's needed is one or two reliable sources establishing that the reason the cod hangs in the State House is its traditional importance in the area, or whatever, plus a few examples of the cod's use as a symbol in seals etc., and maybe something like the Morison quote. This isn't an article about the fishing industry -- all this detail about the number of boats and so on is irrelevant.
 The photos of the Crimson building and UMass are deadweight far disconnected from the article subject. "This is the building that housed the newspaper that had an editor who was kidnapped by the jokesters that stole the cod that hung in the chambers that were in the House the Bulfinch built." Exterior photos of the Old and modern State Houses would be more appropriate.
Useful and enlivening sources are not incorporated e.g. (some of these might be in the article already, and probably most are not fruitful -- but some absolutely belong):
There is far too much detail about the thefts -- exact time of recovery; order in which various parts of the State House were searched; what was worn by men jumping out of the car; that a chair, then a ladder, then wire cutters, were used; etc. -- about 1/3 of the article. Each incident should be covered in a paragraph or two at most. For example,
 
Three days after the theft, a search of the State House began when another phone call was received, this time by a man described as "the father of one of the students reported to have taken the cod." He explained that the students never removed the carving from the State House and they had stashed it somewhere in the cellar of the building. Capitol police searched the cellar, found nothing, then continued their search on the upper levels of the building. At 5:30 p.m. on November 17, 1968, the Sacred Cod was found standing on its tail just outside the House Chamber behind a door in a hallway used only while the House is in session. Apparently after the thieves had taken the 80 pounds (36 kg) fish down from its hanging place, they had brought it down a private staircase and left it in this hallway undamaged.
Do we really need to know it was standing on its tail? That the police searched the cellar first? The exact date and time they found it? Why not
Three days after the theft the police, acting on a tip, found the Sacred Cod in a State House hallway used only when the House is in session.
(The 80 lbs, if included at all, should be part of the object's description.)
 What source supports Representation of a codfish as any kind of official name?
  EEng (talk) 05:11, 11 February 2013 (UTC) 
 
As it says on my user page, time on the internet is currently at a premium for me, as I do not have it at my house right now. I will begin working on these notes as soon as possible, but I have also noticed you are extensively editing the article as well. When looking at a few of your suggestions here, it seems you have already fixed them yourself. Could you please note when you do that? Also much of the "detail about the thefts" and the information in the background section you do not agree with was requested to be included in previous peer reviews. The same goes for the section about the theft you moved to notes. It was explicitly requested to be in the article in a peer review. Later today or tomorrow, when I have time to edit, and have internet available, I will begin working on your notes. Found5dollar (talk) 16:40, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): Wehwalt (talk) 00:33, 16 January 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article because... I believe it meets the criteria. Andrew Johnson is today not considered anywhere near the top of the list for American presidents. Yet he had a public career of over forty years, and became the only former president to serve in the Senate, so I hope you'll agree that there's more to the man than met the eye when they impeached him. Enjoy. Thanks to Khazar2 and Rjensen for reviewing the article.Wehwalt (talk) 00:33, 16 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Source review - spotchecks not done 
 FN40: publisher?
FN107: doubled period
Fn115: page formatting. Nikkimaria (talk) 17:55, 16 January 2013 (UTC)
 Better than I usually do! I'll fix these tonight. Thanks.--20:47, 16 January 2013 (UTC)
Done, thanks.--Wehwalt (talk) 10:38, 18 January 2013 (UTC)
  Comments. As always, feel free to revert my copyediting. Please check the edit summaries. - Dank (push to talk) 
 Great to see the three of you at FAC, if you're all here ... Milhist is putting together a GLAM collaboration, and you're all welcome to jump in during the planning stages.
I wasn't wild about "natal characteristic", I went with: "Being born in a log cabin was a potent symbol of political virtue and simplicity in the 19th century, and Johnson did not hesitate to remind voters of his humble birth in future elections." (I'm going partly on my memory of a BookTV talk by Gordon-Reed ... if this doesn't correspond to pp. 17-18, feel free to fiddle with that.) - Dank (push to talk) 20:37, 16 January 2013 (UTC)
 
I'll see what the writer has to say on the speeches, but I'll certainly scrap the adjective. Do you have a link on the GLAM? Happy to help if I can.--Wehwalt (talk) 20:47, 16 January 2013 (UTC)
Start with WT:MHC#New GLAM proposal. - Dank (push to talk) 21:15, 16 January 2013 (UTC)
 "As a consequence, Johnson assumed an attitude of white supremacy, which he kept throughout his life.": I removed "As a consequence" and otherwise left this alone. I guess this is mainly a personal preference based on what seems to me to be a firm trend in expository prose, but IMO there's a broader point; feel free to disagree. Sociologists and historians can make scientific statements about attitudes associated with certain economic conditions. They're on slightly looser ground when they assert which way the causation goes ... but the case can be made. They're on quicksand when they attempt to assert that a particular 19th-century figure's attitudes were a direct result of such-and-such; for all we know, he had unfortunate experiences in his formative years, or he got his attitudes from his mother. - Dank (push to talk) 21:15, 16 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Fair enough. It was a bit loose.--Wehwalt (talk) 21:54, 16 January 2013 (UTC)
 "Johnson supported the Polk administration's decision to fight the Mexican War, which was seen by some northerners as an attempt to gain territory to expand slavery westward.": "which" dangles: does it refer to the war itself, or his support? Probably best to reword ... if it's the former, I'd go with: "Johnson's support for the Mexican War was seen ...". - Dank (push to talk) 02:27, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
"the office was a bully pulpit which allowed him": that allowed him, or allowing him
"the ticket of Buchanan and former Kentucky representative John C. Breckenridge, which was elected": Not wrong, but you usually see "who were elected" in a context like this.
"he made proposals which were popular among Democrats": probably "he made proposals popular with the Democrats"
"a Union which could not be dissolved": "that" would be correct, but I'd go with "an indissolvable Union" or some synonym. - Dank (push to talk) 02:46, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
"in areas which had been in revolt": that
"most states which voted": most states that had voted
"without making political deals, which occurred": ... which he did
"a proposal which had been defeated": that
"The veto of the Civil Rights Act of 1866 is often seen as a key mistake of Johnson's presidency, which convinced Moderates ...": The veto of the Civil Rights Act of 1866, often seen as a key mistake of Johnson's presidency, convinced Moderates ...
"engaging in arguments with hecklers which were criticized as undignified": "engaging in undignified arguments with hecklers", unless you're saying the arguments were misrepresented as undignified
 
By the standards of 1866, for a president to engage in back and forth with hecklers was seen as undignified. I am trying to tell the reader how they were perceived, rather than describing what they were. Thoughts?--Wehwalt (talk) 11:27, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
Aha, I didn't get that. Okay, write what you just said :) - Dank (push to talk) 15:03, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
 "The Republicans gained two senators and a state which promptly ratified the amendment.": Probably "The Republicans gained two senators, and a state that promptly ratified the amendment."
"after which the Senate confirmed Schofield": and the Senate confirmed Schofield (to prevent repetition of "after which")
"Another treaty which fared badly": Another treaty that fared badly
"a pardon which ended": a pardon that ended, or a pardon ending
"where cities which had been hostile to him during the war as senator and military governor": where cities hostile to him during the war [which implies senator and military governor, I think]
"setting a pattern which would be repeated": that
"Through the days which followed": that
"personal flaws which scarred his presidency", "deep flaws which sabotaged his presidency": both require "that" ... and they're a bit too similar.
"A series of highly-favorable biographies ... which": A series of highly favorable [no hyphen] biographies ... that - Dank (push to talk) 04:31, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Great, I'll work through these.--Wehwalt (talk) 10:58, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
All those are done. Thanks.--Wehwalt (talk) 11:47, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
 Oppose. Sorry, but we're not off to a good start ... I picked just one issue, misuse of "which", and pointed out all the problems, and it's still wrong: "t Buchanan", "which had been in revolt", "engaging in arguments with hecklers which were seen as undignified for a president" (among other problems, referent and verb don't agree: it wasn't the (plural) arguments that were undignified, or the hecklers, it was that he was engaging in them, so "were" is wrong), "days which followed", "deep flaws which sabotaged his presidency". Disclaimers on "which": I've noticed that people who write about earlier times use the word more liberally, because that's how it was used back then. It continues to be used in the sense you're using it informally (I use that way all the time), and it is also used in the best prose occasionally to signal emphasis. Having said all that: this oppose is not a "thumbs down" of any kind, simply an admission that there's more to do here than I have time to do, particularly if I have to go back and check to see if you've really made the fixes you said you did. If you can find another copyeditor who does have time, and I get the sense that they're doing a thorough job, I'll be more than happy to strike my oppose and turn the job over to them. - Dank (push to talk) 19:44, 18 January 2013 (UTC)
 
That's fine. I'll ask you to look in after other reviewers have taken their shot. Sorry if I was hasty, I'm doing this in hasty hours this week. Would you mind if I took a second shot at the above, and perhaps you'd reconsider?--Wehwalt (talk) 20:38, 18 January 2013 (UTC)
I've removed or rephrased anything likely to cause offense. It was not inattention, that particular distinction is not one of my strongest suits.--Wehwalt (talk) 01:24, 19 January 2013 (UTC)
 I won't fix it myself, but "Johnson" is repeated way too often. Use forms of address ("the Senator" for instance) and "he". - Dank (push to talk) 15:33, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 
"the senator". I'll see where it can be done without looking forced. Note that we may not agree in full on this.--Wehwalt (talk) 16:01, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 "came to refuse": refused? later refused? - Dank (push to talk) 15:44, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Fixed.--Wehwalt (talk) 16:01, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 [Johnson opposed] "the prohibition of alcohol, and the Know Nothing Party". It's better not to use one word in two different senses at once. - Dank (push to talk) 16:29, 25 January 2013 (UTC) P.S. Put another way: what does it mean that he opposed that party? Whatever it means, it's not the same thing as opposing a proposed law. - Dank (push to talk) 18:55, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 
I'll play with it. What it's saying is he didn't like their anti-immigrant policy, which was controversial, and especially since their members were initially told, rather famously, that if asked about the party, they were to say they knew nothing about it. They didn't last long, the country had bigger fish to fry.--Wehwalt (talk) 19:00, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 "on a tied procedural vote broken by Vice President Breckinridge against the bill": Since you reverted me, I guess I don't know what you're saying, I thought my version was clear ... maybe it was clear and wrong :) - Dank (push to talk) 18:51, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 
"breaking the tie in a procedural vote" read oddly to my ears. I didn't revert you actually. I think it's OK for people to toss back alternate versions at each other until they find one that sticks, when both are trying to accomplish the same end.--Wehwalt (talk) 18:57, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
I've never heard the expression "breaking a vote". What's a broken vote? - Dank (push to talk) 20:24, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
Meant to say "tied", sorry, but that still wouldn't help. I've taken another shot at it.--Wehwalt (talk) 20:45, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 I accidentally lowercased two things inside quotes, I've restored them. Btw, "Southerner" vs. "southerner" is a nice example of how uppercasing makes sense in one context but not another. Current style guides prefer uppercasing for general readers, but people for whom "southerner" can only mean one thing can lowercase it without fear of being misunderstood. - Dank (push to talk) 22:26, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Not a problem. Thank you for the time you've put in on this.--Wehwalt (talk) 02:45, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
 "The President gave permission for constitutional conventions": I don't know what "gave permission" means.
 
He issued proclamations, directing the people of a state to elect delegates to gather and decide on a(n acceptable) constitution and hold elections under it. It's alternative language as I have Johnson issuing proclamations multiple times, so I wanted different language.--Wehwalt (talk) 16:54, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
 "received considerable public support, which he took as unconditional backing for quick reinstatement of the South. While he received such support from the white South": The first sentence says his policies "received considerable public support"; the second sentence says the support came from a minority. - Dank (push to talk) 14:49, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
 
I'll add "In the North". The white South was initially rather apprehensive, given Johnson's past statements about rebels.--Wehwalt (talk) 16:54, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Given that it is produced by an inflation template it is possibly best to have it undated.--Wehwalt (talk) 02:39, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 Support on prose per standard disclaimer, except for the problem I just mentioned, and I'll leave that for others. (Personally, I'd put the conversion in a footnote.) These are my edits. - Dank (push to talk) 04:10, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Thank you for a most thorough review and for bearing with me.--Wehwalt (talk) 06:29, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Thanks for tackling the really hard stuff. My pleasure. - Dank (push to talk) 14:41, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
  Comment - "Johnson, born in poverty, became a master tailor." I don't like how this sentence reads, I don't understand how being born into poverty is linked to him being a "master tailor". --Andrew 16:00, 18 January 2013 (UTC) 
 I've recast it, and deleted the "master" which is difficult to quantify.--Wehwalt (talk) 16:09, 18 January 2013 (UTC)
  Support . I carried out a detailed informal peer review, details on the article's talkpage. I am happy with the responses, and have just a few points outstanding: 
 In the "Congressman" section: "general-election" is not a hyphenated term
In the same part of that section (and continuing a point I raised in the review): "Rival for a fifth term" implies that both Haynes and Johnson were seeking fifth terms. Was this the case? Otherwise, they were merely rival candidates for election.
In the "Impeachment" section there are two separate mentions of Stanbery giving up his office to act as Johnson's counsel.
  I have also done some general copyediting. The nom may have been a mite premature, but I believe that the prose is now of the required standard, the narrative is compelling and the research looks terrific. I have not done an image review but I can't see any likely problems here. This looks a fine addition to the "American presidents" series (only about 30 to go and they'll all be FAs) Brianboulton (talk) 20:43, 23 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Thank you for that. I'll work through these. "Rival for a fifth term" was a phrase I struggled with and would welcome suggestions from FAC page stalkers. All the other ways of putting it I could come up with seemed somewhat awkward. Thirty? Well, we will have to see.--Wehwalt (talk) 20:47, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
I got the last one, and Wehwalt and I got the first two. - Dank (push to talk) 20:55, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Something like that. Thank you both.--Wehwalt (talk) 20:58, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
  Comments 
 In November 1867, "the Democrats took control of the Ohio General Assembly, allowing them to defeat for re-election [...] Senator Benjamin Wade". According to his article, he was elected senator in 1863 and did not faced election this year.
 
Before 1866, states were rather random with how they elected senators; Johnson wasn't even elected until after his term began in 1857 (there was probably some shenanigans with split control of legislative houses to avoid a Senate election, too, that happened a lot in Tennessee). In 1866, Congress passed legislation that standardized when the election of senators took place. Congress decreed that the election take place shortly after the legislature which would be in office when the Senate term expired first convened. So Wade's term expired March 3, 1869, and the Ohio legislature which would be in session when his term expired was elected in November 1867 and would convene in January 1868, and the law forced them to begin the balloting for senator the second week of the legislative session, and to keep voting if they couldn't decide. So basically, Wade became a lame duck a little under 14 months before the end of his term. Ohio changed this, to even-year elections, in 1905.--Wehwalt (talk) 22:31, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
Our article is literally correct, Wade was defeated in the 1868 elections. The January 1868 elections, in the Ohio General Assembly. I suspect whoever wrote that really didn't understand that. When I get a chance (after this FAC closes, for transparency) I'll do something about that.--Wehwalt (talk) 22:35, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 "Kansas Senator Edmund G. Ross received assurances that the new constitutions ratified in South Carolina and Arkansas would be transmitted to the Congress". Could you explain this sentence because I do not see the link with the impeachment. Les3corbiers (talk) 21:48, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 
I've clarified this matter.--Wehwalt (talk) 23:13, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 "When the President was slow to officially report ratifications of the Fourteenth Amendment by the new Southern legislatures". According to Hollingsworth v. Virginia, the President has no formal role in the process of amending the Constitution. Was Johnson some kind of unwilling PO box who refused to send ratifications to the Congress to prevent the adoption of the amendment ? Les3corbiers (talk) 17:50, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 
The executive branch still administers the process; the beribboned ratifications from the legislatures were sent to the Department of State, although Trefousse specifically states that Johnson, not Seward, did the notifications to Congress. Today, I recall from the ratification of the 27th Amt. that it is the Archivist of the United States who does the work. So yeah, pretty much. He was trying to be as difficult as he could without breaking the assurances he had given senators like Ross and Grimes.--Wehwalt (talk) 17:57, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
Thanks, I understand it much better now. By the way, I have translated the article into French. Les3corbiers (talk) 09:30, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
Well done.--Wehwalt (talk) 11:33, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
  Support Comments. Very nice article. A have a few comments and questions: 
 In the lede, the language about AJ being a "logical choice" is confusing to readers who don't understand the National Union party. Maybe a few brief words about why Lincoln chose a Democrat.
In "Boyhood", the sentence about his "lifelong love of learning" is confusing.
In "Tennessee politician", I'd change the last sentence to remove the semi-colon and end with "and about eight or nine slaves".
  ...more comments to come. --Coemgenus (talk) 14:32, 28 January 2013 (UTC) 
 
Good to see you, and thanks. Those things are done.--Wehwalt (talk) 15:10, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
Could you substitute something for "chattel"? I only see that in legal and scholarly contexts these days. - Dank (push to talk) 00:55, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
  More comments: 
 In "Vice President", the phrase "it is known that" adds nothing. I'd cut it.
In "Accession", I'm not sure Castel's opinion adds much. He doesn't contradict Trefousse and Gordon-Reed, so I'd just say that Johnson &amp; Lincoln discussed whatever, unless there's some pressing reason to get into the historiography.
In "Judicial appointments", is "crony" the best word? Seems a bit POV-ish.
 
It's how we described Day in McKinley. Except Canton crony.--Wehwalt (talk) 16:53, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
Hmm. Guess I can't complain then! --Coemgenus (talk) 00:37, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
 The "Historical view" section is very well-written, but could probably be summarized more succinctly to the extent that it discusses Reconstruction generally and not Johnson's reputation specifically.
 
I don't know how you separate the two ... the two rise and fall together, or possibly one rises as the other sinks.
That's true. AJ's rep is as much tied to the perception of Reconstruction as anything.
 I'd delete the "See also" section altogether.
That's it. Great article -- good luck! --Coemgenus (talk) 16:02, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Thanks, appreciate it. Good seeing you again. Except as noted above, I'll implement.--Wehwalt (talk) 16:53, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
Cool, glad I could help. I changed to support. --Coemgenus (talk) 00:37, 31 January 2013 (UTC)
Thanks for the review and support. By the way, looks like I started the "crony" in Hanna and it went on from there.
Request Could someone do an image check please? For delegate summary purposes, we have three supports and nothing presently going on.--Wehwalt (talk) 01:28, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
  Image check - all OK (PD-1923, own work). Sources and authors provided (or Library of Congress-image with sufficient background information). Some minor bugs/typos tweaked. GermanJoe (talk) 11:44, 4 February 2013 (UTC) 
 
Thank you on that. Three supports, checks done. I'm available if anything else comes up.--Wehwalt (talk) 12:15, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): Lemurbaby (talk) 04:05, 15 January 2013 (UTC)
  Learn about Rakoto Frah, possibly the greatest cultural hero of Madagascar in the 20th century - all because of his incredible skills and creativity as a performer of the sodina, a traditional flute brought over with the island's original Indonesian settlers more than two millennia ago. Although Rakoto Frah isn't well known in the US, Ian Anderson, flutist of Jethro Tull, cited him as an influence. I'm nominating the article because it's complete, thoroughly researched and definitely a noteworthy topic - particularly since he's the only non-political figure ever to appear on a Malagasy banknote. Lemurbaby (talk) 04:05, 15 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Media review 
 
I've corrected that one hyphenated instance to Feo Gasy. Thanks for catching that. Lemurbaby (talk) 01:20, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
 File:Feogasy_Rakotofrah.ogg: this non-free sample does not include an FUR for this specific article. Also, should use creation not upload date. Nikkimaria (talk) 17:48, 16 January 2013 (UTC)
 
I've added a mention/link to this article, corrected to show the creation date, and expanded a bit on the justification. Lemurbaby (talk) 01:20, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
  Comments from Crisco 1492 
 Addressed comments moved to talk
 Support, my comments have all been dealt with to my satisfaction. — Crisco 1492 (talk) 04:22, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
  Source review &amp; comments by Maky: 
 Like Crisco 1492 above, the weight of the last paragraph seems a little strong. The mention is fine, but details about the cohorts seems a little over-the-top.
 
I've shortened and reframed now (see my response to Crisco above). Lemurbaby (talk) 04:18, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
It is better. Just be aware that you will need to keep this material up-to-date because of the potentially dated statements that are made. – Maky « talk » 03:57, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
 I found some close paraphrasing where it reads: "The American composer and jazz saxophonist Ornette Coleman described Rakoto Frah as having some of the best phrasing of any musician in the world. Ian Anderson, flutist and leader of Jethro Tull, cited him as a key influence." (Source: "Ornette Coleman disait de lui qu’il possédait un des plus beaux phrasés du monde. Ian Anderson, flûtiste et leader de Jethro Tull, le citait comme sa référence majeure.) This is very close to a direct translation.
 
If the source were in English I'd be happy to put quotes around it - can I do that with a direct translation? Lemurbaby (talk) 04:18, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Okay, I put quotes around these. Lemurbaby (talk) 03:24, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
 "By exposing global audiences to traditional sodina performances, Rakoto Frah became an unofficial ambassador of the instrument and the musical heritage of Madagascar." – I'm not sure the source supports this.
 
I'll come back to this hopefully after work to find a better source (or sources). Lemurbaby (talk) 04:18, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
I removed references to the term "unofficial ambassador" and instead discussed how he raised international awareness of traditional Malagasy music, or promoted traditional music internationally. Lemurbaby (talk) 03:24, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
  Otherwise, every other randomly sampled sentence checked out with its source without any close paraphrasing. I reviewed the GAN a while back, and feel this article is very near FAC standards. I will be happy to support when the issues are addressed. – Maky « talk » 19:21, 23 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Maky and Crisco, I've addressed all your comments. Thanks for your reviews. Lemurbaby (talk) 03:24, 1 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Support: I now feel this article meets FAC standards. – Maky « talk » 03:57, 12 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Comments from Amakuru: 
 I've not reviewed too many articles before, but have done the FAC thing myself a couple of times so will give this one a go... feel free to contradict anything I say if it doesn't make sense! 
 Lead: 
 When reading the lead I was left wondering what Rakoto did between 1958 and 1970 when he was in his first phase of popularity; what the article covers this but the lead doesn't really.
Similarly for the mid-1980s onward period. There is lots about what he did during his career in the latter part of the second paragraph, but it's not clear if this refers to both periods of popularity or just the second.
  Early years: 
 "Both of Philibert's parents were already aged at the time of his birth" - the term "aged" seems a bit nonspecific; I know it means something like "old" but that could mean 35, 55 or 75!
"he was given the nickname Rakoto by an older brother of the same name" - which same name? Was the older brother also called Rakoto or Philibert? And why did he choose to give the same name to his younger brother as a nickname?
"One of the oldest and most iconic musical instruments in Madagascar" - the word iconic seems a little WP:WEASEL like.
  National symbol: 
 "Tsiranana had previously seen the flutist perform" - where did he see him perform?
"was the first to refer to the artist as Rakoto Frah" - why did he refer to him as that? What does it mean?
"Rakoto Frah is considered one of the first musicians to have increased the visibility and popularity of traditional Malagasy music overseas" - two things here:
it uses passive voice, which I believe is discouraged (see WP:WEASEL#Passive and middle voice). It would be better to say who considers him to be...
the phrase "one of the first to have increased ..." sounds a bit odd - increased could mean taking it from 0% to 1%, or from 50% to 70%; so being one of the first to increase doesn't sound like you're saying very much, if that makes any sense.
"Ben Mandelson and Roger Armstrong" - who are they?
"Rakoto Frah soon came to their attention" - how did this happen? At this point Rakoto had been out of the limelight for 15 years, if I understand correctly.
The article mentions that he was poor, which is in part due to weak enforcement of copyright laws. But he also did a lot of touring and sold albums internationally as well. Did he not get any revenue from that?
"Famadihana" - I know it is explained what this means in the lead, but should it also be explained in the body?
  Style and legacy: 
 "Rakoto Frah would often perform personalized variations" - would this read better as simply "Rakoto Frah often performed personalized variations" ?
"as well as ones he created" - just wondering if that is suitably encyclopedic language
"widely respected for his musical virtuosity and his humane personality" - what does "humane personality" mean? I got pulled up on my Maraba coffee FAC for referring to it as an "ethical company" and this probably falls under the same category!
"when playing with others he would listen to determine the key of the song performed in order to accompany it" - something seems slightly contorted about the phrasing there, but that might be just me
"it became a rare collector's item valued in 2011 at over 100,000 ariary" - maybe include a USD equivalent for this? I personally have no idea how much an ariary is worth so can't immediately get the sense of this point.
  General: 
 The word sodina is sometimes written with italics, and sometimes not.
Similarly famadihana is sometimes written with italics, and sometimes not.
Wondering if the paragraph structure could be modified; there is a paragraph called "style and legacy" but the last part of the "national symbol" paragraph (the famadihana etc.) is also really about his legacy. Might it make more sense to have "National symbol" (just the story of his life), "Death and legacy" (the famadihana and legacy stuff from the next paragraphy) and "Style" as separate paragraphs?
Is there any more known about his family, wife, children etc.? The article mentions granddaughters and children a couple of times, but the information is not formally presented anywhere.
  That's my lot for now. But the above minor points aside, it's definitely a great article and I really enjoyed reading it on my way home from work yesterday. Thanks!  — Amakuru (talk) 17:42, 12 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Nominator(s): Dan56 (talk) 23:28, 14 January 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this as a featured article candidate because I feel it is well written, its topic is fairly notable, and it fulfills FA criteria. Dan56 (talk) 23:28, 14 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Initial comment – first and foremost, the lead is a little too long for the article's size. We have around 23 KB of prose, but need 30 for a four-paragraph introduction. Please trim the lead down to three paragraphs, weeding out excessive detail and instead giving a more concise overview of what's to be expected further down. For example, there's quite a bit of unnecessary discussion of the song's chart performance and sales. That needs to be tightened. Overall, this seems to be an engaging article. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 00:51, 17 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Done. Dan56 (talk) 01:40, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Unless another image check is needed for purposes of this review, this could be looked at as a point of reference. Dan56 (talk) 06:36, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
 Comments from Cassianto
  I'm not too familiar with this young lady's work, so excuse my ignorance if I get a few things wrong. All comments come in good faith so feel free to disagree. 
 Lead Section
 "After releasing her 1996 album One in a Million and raising her profile with hit soundtrack singles..." Such as?
 
I didnt think it was relevant enough to go into that much detail for the lead, which the previous commentator here suggested I trim to begin with. Those singles are covered well enough at Aaliyah. It's a minor detail being summarizied from the short "background" paragraph of this article. Dan56 (talk) 21:40, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 "She started working on the album in 1998 and resumed its recording in 2000" - Did she stop midway then? If so, why was that? There was no mention that she had started recording, only that she was working on it. Two years to record an album does seem a long time.
 
Revised. Dan56 (talk) 21:40, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 "Upon its release, Aaliyah received very positive reviews..." The adverb offers nothing here and sounds grammatically wrong.
 
See comment at Critical reception. Dan56 (talk) 21:40, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 "Aaliyah subsequently shot a music video for the single "Rock the Boat" in the Bahamas, but died returning to the United States in a plane crash on August 25, 2001." - Subsequent to what? What happened prior to this as suggested?
 
Added a bit of what I previously trimmed from the lead to clarify. Dan56 (talk) 21:40, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 "... but died returning to the United States in a plane crash on August 25, 2001." Might I suggest, "but died in a plane crash on a return flight to the United States on August 25 2001."
 
Done. Dan56 (talk) 21:40, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 "After her death, the album's sales skyrocketed..." hmm...not sure about "Skyrocketed". It sounds a bit magaziney.
 
I thought so at first after trying to find a synonym for what the source used (cited in the "commercial performance" section), but it seemed to be legit term used in economic/financial journals after looking through Google Books and News. Seems the most appropriate in this context. Dan56 (talk) 21:40, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 Background
 "After releasing her 1996 album One in a Million, Aaliyah graduated from high school the following year and recorded several songs for film soundtracks" - Which soundtracks? Give maybe one example here.
 
"Are You That Somebody?" is the soundtrack single most mentioned in the sources I researched for background on this album, so I mentioned it in the sentence following this one. Dan56 (talk) 21:40, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 Recording
 "He found Aaliyah to be ideal for his songwriting style" would be better
 
Done. Dan56 (talk) 21:40, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 Some might not know what "Jet" is, so I would use Jet magazine so as not to force the reader to click off to find out.
 
Done. Dan56 (talk) 21:40, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 Music and lyrics
 "A neo soul album, Aaliyah features midtempo funk songs, hip hop-textured uptempo tracks, and slow jams that draw on older soul influences, including 1970s influences." - Repetition of influences.
 
Done. Removed "1970s influences". Dan56 (talk) 21:40, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 The section overall appears to be right on the boarder with quote overuse. I does read a bit clunky if I'm honest as there are so many short quotes; for example why does "classic soul" appear in quotes? This is not praise or a view and is merely a descriptive term based on a critics perception of a particular musical genre which he likens it too.
 
Done. Paraphrased and copy-edited a bit. Dan56 (talk) 21:40, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 ""doesn't put up with unfaithful cads ('You Got Nerve'), mind games ('I Refuse'), self-impressed hunks ('Extra Smooth'), gossip and envy ('Loose Rap'), or physical abuse ('Never No More')." - Do the parenthesis appear in the actual quote?
 
Yes. Dan56 (talk) 21:40, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 Songs
  Looks OK. 
 Critical reception
 "Aaliyah received very positive reviews from contemporary music critics" - again, "very". It's difficult to compare "very positive reviews" to "positive reviews". Surely, positive is positive isn't it?
 
The source cited refers to "excellent reviews", which the reviewer at this article's Good-article review suggested should be toned down, so I replaced it with "very positive". Perhaps "highly positive" then? Dan56 (talk) 21:40, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 Commercial performance
 "The album debuted at number two on the Billboard 200, selling 187,000 copies in the week of August 4, 2001." - Bold claim, citation?
 
No it's cited, the citation immediately following that sentnce "...Although it was the highest sales week of Aaliyah's career,[4]". I was told in last FAC not to repeat citations, that when the citation finally does appear, it implies that it's covering everything before it. Dan56 (talk) 21:40, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
That would be the correct advice. Is it covered by ref [4] or 55? [4], to me, would suggest that it just covers Aaliyah's highest sales week claim as there is a period after the album sales. 55 would appear to cover everything else. -- CassiantoTalk 22:03, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
It's [4] that covers the highest sales week claim and the debut/sale figure preceding it. Dan56 (talk) 22:12, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
I'll just cite it twice to avoid any potential confusion. Dan56 (talk) 23:39, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
Fair enough. If any one has a cause of complain, feel free to revert; it is not that serious enough for it to effect a support. -- CassiantoTalk 01:31, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
 Accolades
  Legacy 
 These are just minor remarks and overall, the article is in great shape. -- CassiantoTalk 10:18, 26 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Support - Appears all correct. All points have been addressed satisfactorily. Congratulations on a thorough and informative article. -- CassiantoTalk 08:18, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 Support - Very well-written, informative, and complete. Seems notable enough as well. Just two minor observations: the year-end charts published by UKChartsPlus are listed at WP:BADCHARTS, and the release history table needs !scope="row"| for consistency with other tables in the article. Other than that, excellent work. SnapSnap 04:39, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
 
Removed UK year-end, added row/scope to table. Dan56 (talk) 05:16, 2 February 2013 (UTC)
 [edit] Review by Wikipedian Penguin 
 Oppose—the article has a few issues, I am afraid, ranging from prose quality to level of focus. It isn't too far, and with a little bit more work, I think we can ultimately reach a support. 
 Lede
"Aaliyah is the eponymous third and final studio album by American R&amp;B recording artist Aaliyah, released on July 7, 2001, by Blackground Records and Virgin Records."—"eponymous" is redundant here.
Removed "eponymous"
"Aaliyah started working on the album in 1998 and sought to schedule its recording around her developing film career."—the second part is blurry to me. Please clarify.
Revised to "...in 1998, but rescheduled its recording around her developing film career."
"Upon its release, Aaliyah received very positive reviews from music critics, who praised its creative R&amp;B production, Static's songwriting, and Aaliyah's vocal performance."—the "very" modifier does not seem useful to me. You suggested "highly" above; that would work, IMO.
Done.
Fused participle—"With Blackground and Virgin wanting a high charting single to increase sales..."
Would this be more correct?: "As Blackground and Virgin wanted a high charting single to increase sales..." ?
Not bad, although I would replace "as" with "because" or "since". It sounds more familiar to most readers. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 19:25, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
Done. Dan56 (talk) 01:05, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
"As of December 2009, it has sold 2.6 million copies, according to Nielsen SoundScan."—the tense and use of "as of" in conjunction with the date give the impression that the article has not been updated in a long time.
Rephrased as "By December, it had sold..."
"Aaliyah was released during a period of peak activity in R&amp;B in the summer of 2001 and, since its initial reception, has been cited by critics as one of the best R&amp;B albums of its time."—(1) I'm sure to a disinterested reader, "a period of peak activity in R&amp;B" will be an unclear phrase. (2) Avoid references to seasons. Summer means one thing to someone who lives in the US, and something different to someone in, say, Chile.
The source citing the material being summarized here (in the "Legacy" section) refers to it as R&amp;B's "golden age" during "the summer of 2001". I removed "summer" in the lead and replaced "period of peak activity" with "golden age", but could there be something synonymous with "summer" in the "Legacy" section? The timing seems pertinent to the period discussed, not simply 2001.
To be honest, "golden age" is even more unclear. Maybe, "Released in mid-2001, a period when contemporary R&amp;B was popular, Aaliyah has been cited by critics as one of the best R&amp;B albums of its time." I hope that does not modify the meaning of what you're trying to say. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 19:25, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
Considering the definition, and the way it's used by the sources in the section this is summarizing, it's not referring to (only) popularity but artistic peak in the genre as well. "A period when..." gives off the impression that mid-2001 was the only such period. English-language readers should understand the phrase "golden age", as it's commonly used enough when discussing the arts &amp; entertainment, and doesnt seem colloquial or too informal. The best I could come up with to rephrase but preserve the same meaning is "period of peak activity", or perhaps "released during an artistic and commercial high point in contemporary R&amp;B"? "Mid-2001" is definitely better though. Dan56 (talk) 01:05, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
I think we should stick to "period of peak activity". Second guessing, I don't think too many people will question the phrase. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 01:12, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
Done. Dan56 (talk) 01:15, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
Background
"After releasing her 1996 album One in a Million, Aaliyah graduated from high school the following year and recorded several songs for film soundtracks."—remove "several". It's too vague.
Done
Some redundancy here: "...but she postponed the recording process in order to develop an acting career"
Done.
"Aaliyah sought to schedule the album's recording around her film career."—likewise per lede.
Removed.
Recording
"but they could not coordinate their respective schedules."—remove "respective".
Done.
"Most of Aaliyah was recorded at either Sony Studios in New York City or Sing Sing Studios in Melbourne, including "Loose Rap", which was done at both studios."—odd conjunction of "Most of Aaliyah" and "Loose Rap". I suggest adding "the songs for" before "Aaliah" or add "the track" before "Loose Rap".
Done.
"The latter song, written by past collaborator Missy Elliott, was originally recorded by Aaliyah in 1996 for One in a Million, but scrapped after that album's completion."—(1) "latter" refers to the last of two items, not any more. (2) there's a little too much passive voice here. I would rewrite this in active voice (She had recorded...", which brings me to my next point) (3) The tense should be past perfect since this is before the recording of the other tracks.
Done.
"Most of the album's lyrics were written by Static of R&amp;B band Playa."—nit-picky, yes, but I strongly suggest active voice here as it sounds more impressive. So "Static of R&amp;B band Playa wrote most of the album's lyrics."
Done.
"Static was a part of Aaliyah's close-knit circle of friends..."—that phrase is too colloquial and informal. Write it as something plain and simple. Also, "shared an infatuation with her during their respective careers" seems irrelevant and like unencyclopedic trivia.
Replaced "close-knit circle..." with "close group of friends". The latter would seem relevant to the nature of their working relationship and Static's subject matter/lyrics, providing context.
OK, then probably simply "was infatuated with her then". "During their respective careers" is unneeded. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 19:25, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
They were both infatuated with each other, not just him being infatuated with her, or do you mean that it is grammatically incorrect to "share an infatuation" with someone? Removed "during their..." Dan56 (talk) 01:05, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
In the final paragraph, there's a lot of repetitive sentence structure (overuse of "which" nonrestrictive clause).
Rephrased two sentences without "which".
Seemed worthy of a link in a music article. Is it too general a term to link?
I guess it can stay owing to the context. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 19:25, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
"Aaliyah was mastered by Bernie Grundman at his eponymous studio in Los Angeles."—I think you are confusing "eponymous" with "namesake". The former refers to something or someone after which/whom something else is named. Not vice-versa, except if it's a literary/musical work (e.g. eponymous album).
Removed "eponymous".
More to come later on. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 00:48, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
 
Changes after the comments above. Dan56 (talk) 04:59, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
 
Change per most recent comments. Dan56 (talk) 01:05, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
Music and lyircs
I think this is more praise than general commentary—"John Mulvey of NME finds the music to be subtle and tasteful, and lacking 'bombast and histrionics.'" "To be" is redundant as well.
Removed "to be" and "tasteful".
"The lyrics express fervent passion and melancholic, occasionally ominous feelings about love."—remove "fervent". It's just an unnecessary intensifier here.
Done.
Active voice works better here, I would think—"Its themes of heartbreak and eroticism are interspersed by subtle, lighthearted humor and witty sound effects such as comical vocal manipulation."
Like this? Dan56 (talk) 04:30, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
Right. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 08:50, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
What makes Citysearch a high quality reliable source for music journalism?
It is one of the reviews collected by Metacritic for this album, which they erroneously credited as "Spin Cycle" (the title of City Search's CD review section). Dan56 (talk) 04:49, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
"Bob Waliszewski of Plugged In observes female empowerment songs..."—maybe "female empowerment-related songs".
Changed.
"Hyun Kim of Vibe asserts that the album..."—replace "the album" with "Aaliayah". Too much repetition.
Done.
Fused participle: "According to Joshua Clover, the more experimental tracks have Aaliyah 'push[ing] notes into strange corners of syncopation's shifty architecture.'" This one's an easy fix. Something like "According to Joshua Clover, Aaliyah 'pushes notes ... ' on the more experimental tracks." However before you make changes, read the next point...
Joshua Clover's review does not say anything about those tracks being experimental, much less with resolution.
The 3rd paragraph of his paragraph speaks of the album in this context: "Each structure invites you inside but won't resolve ... The knowingly titled 'We Need a Resolution' holds off resolution indefinitely, dancing back from the hook...". As for "experimental", I just substituted that for what he said about the songs that "take their time finding a shape, which is then constantly defied as she pushes...". "Experimental" seemed like a more general phrase for "shape-defying", which wouldnt be clear even in music parlance.
Considering experimental music is a specific kind of music, inferring that that is what's meant by "shape-defying" is quite a loose interpretation, almost to the point of WP:OR. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 17:56, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
Good point. I'll just use the quote then, "on the more 'shape-defying' tracks". Dan56 (talk) 02:05, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
Songs
Fused participle in second clause—" The song leaves its hook unresolved, and its music plays backwards after Timbaland's rap,[26] with a reversed loop of the vocal "where were you last night" echoing the female protagonist's sentiment."
Revised.
"'Loose Rap' features subtle Neptunes-styled electronica, aquatic sounds, and velvety harmonies by Aaliyah, who declares '"it ain't just rhythm and blues.'"—add a comma after "declares".
Done.
"... who instructs her lover on how to please her sexually and equates her erotic high to a drug high."—the second part is unclear.
It's being used in the sense of a period of euphoria; the source uses the phrase as it is, so could "high" be linked to the wiktionary page for clarity?
"... Aaliyah sings with an emboldened delivery over harsh guitars and aggressive synthesizers."—specifically, "harsh-sounding guitars".
Done.
"It developed from a conversation between Aaliyah and Static about how men try to act suave."—this took me awhile to get. Maybe "was inspired be"?
Done.
Fused participle—"... with the latter song drawing particularly on Detroit techno and industrial rock."
Revised.
"'What If' angrily threatens an unfaithful lover and by extension other men of that ilk."—woah. That's a little direct. I suggest attribution to a critic, because unless it was Aaliyah or a co-writer who said that, it's a very bold assertion. It's either that or just saying "addresses" instead of "angrily threatens". And maybe "and by extension similar men" instead of using the largely unfamiliar word "ilk".
It's not asserting that Aaliyah, but the song's narrator (which the lyrics seem to: "We'll burn you (oh), we'll cut you (oh) / We'll kill you") Yes, woah indeed. Changed it to "The song's narrator angrily..." and "...by extension similar men".
One concern I have is that there's quite an overlap between these two sections, in that specific tracks are discussed in the Music and lyrics section as well. Would you be open to a merge, or something to deal with this repetition?
The only overlap is citing a few songs as examples occasionally for more general aspects of the album. This already seems long enough. I used a "songs" section to distribute the information available on specific songs as recommended at MOS:ALBUM and from what I've seen at more recent FA articles like OK Computer, although not as large. Dan56 (talk) 04:49, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
More to come later on. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 21:38, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
 
Changes since. Dan56 (talk) 04:55, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
I'm OK with the responses and will move on. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 08:50, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
 Critical reception
I'd briefly mention when the album was released as one sentence as we are not told this and this info is tucked away to the bottom in a less-than-noticeable table.
It's mentioned in the second sentence of the second paragraph in the "commercial performance" section; the opening of that section mentions the chart debut week, which also indicates the time of release; I could work it in there if you still feel it's necessary? Dan56 (talk) 04:47, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
I think "described" is better than "cited" here—"He found the music's textures 'scintillating' and cited the album's 'hallmark' as..."
Revised, as part of the bottom two comments. Dan56 (talk) 04:47, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
The prose is a bit too repetitive. The sentences all begin the same way (critic + magazine). Please try to vary this a little.
Also a problem is the density of quotations. The section is a WP:QUOTEFARM, and as a result, the flow suffers. I recommend you paraphrase and trim out some quotations and not make this section read like an aggregation of review samples.
Done, although you would be a better judge of this. Dan56 (talk) 04:47, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
Better, although I think "examine" is too awkward here. It's hard usually to think of better wording than what's in the source, but perhaps you could think of something. Also, AV Club's Nathan Robin's paraphrase is a little close to the original. You can remove "in her own right" since it's vague. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 23:47, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
How about "commended her for exploring her strengths and fantasies"? For the other one, Rabin seems to be talking about her not being "overshadowed by her collaborators" when he says "in her own right", so could I revise it as "establishes Aaliyah as a significant artist unobscured by her collaborators"? Dan56 (talk) 00:25, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
That looks good. Also, in fewer words, would "establishes Aaliyah as a significant independent artist" work? Regarding "strengths and fantasies", that's good. You can implement that. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 17:47, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
"He cited 'We Need a Resolution' and 'U Got Nerve' as highlights and quippedly called Aaliyah 'a slave to her beats, but a proud slave'."—once again, the use of "cited" here is awkward. And "quippedly": is that word really necessary?
 
Christgau's honorable mention ratings feature a clever, witty remark, following by songs he cites as highlights. Referring to something, especially in praise, is one of the definitions for "cite", although not the primary one, but I dont know if one can "describe" a "hallmark"/characteristic of something. Assuming that these are grammatically correct, this book and this book use either phrase. Removed "quippedly". Dan56 (talk) 04:47, 8 February 2013 (UTC)
 
I will revisit once these comments have been resolved. —WP:PENGUIN · [ TALK ] 20:52, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): Rschen7754 02:51, 14 January 2013 (UTC)
  On March 19, 2011, I was present at the official ribbon-cutting ceremony for the completion of SR 52 from La Jolla (San Diego), where I got my undergraduate degree, to Santee. I have wanted to bring this to FA standard for personal reasons (after SR 78, my first edit and my first FA). However, SR 57 and 56 managed to get in line first... This article was heavily copyedited during its months-long ACR, and I am confident that it is very close to the FA standard. Rschen7754 02:51, 14 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Support and image review - I reviewed this article at Wikipedia:WikiProject Highways/Assessment/A-Class Review/California State Route 52 and feels it meets the FA criteria. In addition, I conducted an image review and determined all the images are fine. Dough4872 02:58, 14 January 2013 (UTC)
I conducted a spotcheck when this article was at ACR, reviewing twenty sources, nineteen of which were newspapers. All of them were verifiable and no plagiarism was evident. –TCN7JM 05:57, 14 January 2013 (UTC)
  Drive by (no pun intended!) comments I don't think that I'll post a full review and have only skimmed the article. While it appears to be very comprehensive and well illustrated (I'm a big fan of self-made photos in FACs), its prose would benefit from some extra work. Some examples: 
 "After this interchange, the freeway leaves the military base " - it's previously stated that the road runs along the edge of the base, not through it as this implies
Clarified. --Rschen7754 10:51, 15 January 2013 (UTC)
"Estimates indicated that residents of La Jolla would save 80 hours a year by using Ardath Road" - I presume you mean that each resident who regularly made this trip would save 80 hours a year, and not everyone in the town as this wording implies if read literally.
Changed. --Rschen7754 08:19, 14 January 2013 (UTC)
"The U.S. Navy was consulted in the planning process due to the road's proposed routing through MCAS Miramar that would provide a delineation on further urban development." - this is a bit unclear
Reworded slightly; if I remember right, I was trying to steer far from the wording of the source and found it difficult. --Rschen7754 11:03, 15 January 2013 (UTC)
" It was dedicated at a community celebration on July 11, 1987, and was scheduled to open to traffic a few weeks later." - did it actually open as planned?
There's admittedly a few places where I use "scheduled to open". What that usually means is that I couldn't find an article about it actually opening. So that means that most likely it did, but I have to go by what the sources say. (There's a few years missing in the newspaper archive I'm using, unfortunately). --Rschen7754 07:45, 14 January 2013 (UTC)
OK. As a suggestion (I'm not at all familiar with the kind of sources available here), would annual reports from the government bodies which built/operated the road have this kind of detail? Nick-D (talk) 07:56, 14 January 2013 (UTC)
In other states yes, but in California no. :( --Rschen7754 07:58, 14 January 2013 (UTC)
"In January 1987, the Santee City Council voted to commence a study of a more northern route, even though some residents and working professionals objected that this would postpone construction" - what's a "working professional" in this context?
Clarified. --Rschen7754 10:13, 15 January 2013 (UTC)
"$89 million (about $214 million in 2012 dollars), compared to the river route's $121 million (about $291 million in 2012 dollars)" - what's the source for these and the other conversions in the article? (and should they now be updated to 2013 dollars?). Given that the dates the various funding was announced is included in the article, are the conversions even necessary? (I'm not sure what the convention is here).
That's using the inflation template, using the specific calculations for US public works projects. I doubt that the template has been updated to 2013 dollars yet. I suppose I can add a source, but that would mean adding it to every single inflation calculation, and I personally think that clutters the article. (Or they could be removed - there's no specific standard here. Most USRD FA writers include them, but I know of one prominent one who does not). --Rschen7754 07:45, 14 January 2013 (UTC)
"however, some employees of the City of Santee were concerned that portions of the report were "outdated." - who were these employees? (I presume that you're referring to town planners and the like rather than librarians or other staff whose official duties weren't relevant!)
Clarified; it did identify two of them. --Rschen7754 06:32, 16 January 2013 (UTC)
"In April 1990, the Santee City Council agreed to begin the purchase of land, over the opposition of Councilman Jim Bartell for environmental reasons." - this is unclear: did the council purchase the land on environmental grounds, or was this Jim Bartell's concern? (it would work better if you replaced the 'for' with 'on', but 'agreed' seems needlessly vague - did the council vote to do this?)
Rephrased. --Rschen7754 07:55, 14 January 2013 (UTC)
File:CA SR 52 Opening.JPG might benefit from being cropped to remove the empty space in the bottom third of the photo if the purpose of the photo is to illustrate the celebrations for the opening of the road - the people walking along it are hard to spot (great work with the self-made photo BTW)
Tried to do some cropping while maintaining roughly the same aspect ratio. --Rschen7754 10:28, 15 January 2013 (UTC)
"Reactions to the extension between SR 125 and SR 67 were mixed, with reports of faster transportation through the East County area. Commuters noted that there is a rush hour backup at SR 125 headed westbound because there are only two lanes traveling west through the interchange." - this is a bit awkwardly worded, and seems to be comparing different things. Also, is the 'reports' and 'commuters noted' construction of these sentences necessary? (can you just say that traffic was faster in the East Country area but there's a traffic jam at SR 125 headed westbound?)
Reportedly is used because this is all according to people the newspaper interviewed. Copyedited. --Rschen7754 08:47, 16 January 2013 (UTC)
"The military erected a fence in 2002 to block a deer tunnel underneath the freeway that led into the Marine base from Mission Trails Regional Park, due to concerns that the tunnel would be used to gain unauthorized access to the base following the September 11 attacks." - this seems rather wordy, and is a bit imprecise (presumably the fence was built as part of a post-September 11 program of works to improve security).
Condensed, but article didn't go into specifics. --Rschen7754 07:41, 16 January 2013 (UTC)
These examples were chosen more or less at random, and I'd suggest giving the prose a general tune up, with a focus on improving the precision of the wording used (which should also result in a slightly shorter article). I hope these comments are helpful. Nick-D (talk) 07:35, 14 January 2013 (UTC)
I'm making another pass through right now. I've made a few comments above where the awkward wording is necessary to represent the sources. --Rschen7754 07:45, 14 January 2013 (UTC)
I've just copy edited a paragraph picked at random to illustrate the kind of wording changes which I think would be helpful (hopefully not causing a really annoying edit conflict for you, but I fear that I have - this is the diff). As noted in the edit summary, please feel free to revert some or all of it if you think it's not an improvement, but I think that those kind of changes would cut down on some redundant wording. Nick-D (talk) 07:56, 14 January 2013 (UTC)
I've done a modification to the copyedit, as there were no letters that were actually published, according to the source. I'm about halfway through my final copyedit (I'll admit I jumped the gun by a few hours - I didn't expect such a quick review!) and hope to finish tomorrow. --Rschen7754 09:39, 14 January 2013 (UTC)
All replied to, and here is the diff with the entire copyedit I did (including your edits): [52] --Rschen7754 08:50, 16 January 2013 (UTC)
Those changes look positive, but as I haven't (and probably won't) read through the article in detail I'll leave this as drive by comments. Nick-D (talk) 07:24, 18 January 2013 (UTC)
 Support — I reviewed this article at the WikiProject A-Class Review. I fully endorse its promotion as a Featured Article.  VC  12:29, 14 January 2013 (UTC)
  Support, looks good! (after stumbling here from an FAC I just started) 
 What is "a large open space"? Is it really just as plain as the description suggests?
Changed. --Rschen7754 05:46, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
"Before entering San Clemente Canyon, the road becomes a freeway as it intersects I-5. The canyon is designated as Marian Bear Natural Park" - so the canyon has two names? Why not say something like "Before entering San Clemente Canyon, also known as MBNP, the road becomes..."?
Changed. --Rschen7754 05:46, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
"the highway passes through an area with Pliocene sedimentary rocks estimated to be 10 million years old that are visible from the freeway" - the writing could be more concise here, since it mentions the roadway twice. It just doesn't seem up to the level of elsewhere in the article.
Changed. --Rschen7754 05:46, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
"the freeway leaves the edge of the military base" - unless I'm mistaken, you never mentioned a base elsewhere in the article. I know this refers to "Marine Corps Air Station Miramar", but it'd be good to see the clarification of it being a "military base" somewhere else. IDK, not a biggie, but it struck me as odd.
"between Santo Road and Mast Boulevard. Access to the path is from Santo Road and from Mast Boulevard" - seems a bit redundant - could you rewrite the latter sentence to avoid re-mentioning both roads?
I'm curious why you felt it was worth mentioning that it's not part of the National Highway System?
A lot of highway articles mention that just to be complete. --Rschen7754 00:16, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
Maybe I'm missing it, but I don't see an indication anywhere why the original western portion of the road was built in the first place? I expected to see that at the beginning of the history section. Unless, is it - " to connect the interchange with San Clemente Canyon Road"?
More or less - providing increased access to the area and to La Jolla. I don't think I could clarify based on my sources. --Rschen7754 05:46, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
"80 hours a year" - should that be "80 hours per year"?
Did the citizen opposition affect any of the progress of the Soledad Expressway?
It doesn't seem like it did - found no articles on extended litigation as happened in later years. --Rschen7754 05:46, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
"(about $36.1 million in 2012 dollars)" - I suggest you use the inflation template to include the current year, since right now it's stuck in the past :P
The public works series has to be updated for 2013; seeing as it's February I get the feeling that it hasn't been updated yet. --Rschen7754 05:46, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
"however, construction did not begin for more than ten years" - any reason? (funding?)
Reworded. --Rschen7754 05:46, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
I'm curious - was it ever proposed to continue eastward toward I-8? Even if there's unofficial rumors or something that can't be put into the article, after reading the article, I'm curious now :)
I've never heard anything, either as a local resident or in my research for this article. The goal was always La Jolla to Santee, as was mentioned at the final opening ceremony. --Rschen7754 00:16, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
  All in all, a good article. Almost ready to support. --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 15:31, 8 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Thanks for the review! Working on the changes. --Rschen7754 00:16, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
  Activity note: I will be offline for the rest of today, Tuesday, and most of Wednesday. I will be back on Thursday. --Rschen7754 23:46, 11 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Nominator(s): Hawkeye7 (talk) 01:31, 13 January 2013 (UTC)
  A perennial favourite for "On this Day.." on 2 March (six times!). I am hoping that we have have it as Today's Featured Article on the 70th Anniversary of the battle on 2 March 2013. One problem: it isn't a Featured Article! Let's see about that... Hawkeye7 (talk) 01:31, 13 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Check out the newsreel video of the battle in the external links. Hawkeye7 (talk) 01:33, 13 January 2013 (UTC)
  Sources and images - spotchecks not done 
 State for Bolling AFB?
Location for Yoshihara?
First map could be bigger
Second map caption should use endash
Sentences that aren't complete sentences shouldn't end in periods, and those that are should
File:BismarckSeaShip.jpg: source link returns error (perhaps because the URL seems to specify a platform that I'm not using)
Switched to using the standard AWM Image template Hawkeye7 (talk) 04:26, 13 January 2013 (UTC)
File:Attack_On_Japanese_Transporter_(Battle_Of_The_Bismarck_Sea).jpg: second source link returns error
I think they have disappeared. Removed. Hawkeye7 (talk) 04:26, 13 January 2013 (UTC)
File:BismarckSeaLowLevel.jpg: can description be a bit more specific about where on that site this image can be found?
Yes, I have that book here. Added a bit. Hawkeye7 (talk) 04:26, 13 January 2013 (UTC)
  Nikkimaria (talk) 03:41, 13 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Note: This is a WikiCup nomination. The following nominators are WikiCup participants: Hawkeye7. To the nominator: if you do not intend to submit this article at the WikiCup, feel free to remove this notice. UcuchaBot (talk) 00:01, 14 January 2013 (UTC)
I was asked to, and agreed to participate in WikiCup. If participation becomes problematic then I will withdraw. Hawkeye7 (talk) 18:48, 14 January 2013 (UTC)
  Comments. As always, feel free to revert my copyediting. Please check the edit summaries. - Dank (push to talk) 
 "Supreme Allied Commander South West Pacific Area". So, I've inserted a comma previously after "Commander", do you prefer it without the comma? - Dank (push to talk) 20:07, 14 January 2013 (UTC)
It's a grammatical issue really. So I've inserted a comma. Hawkeye7 (talk) 21:08, 14 January 2013 (UTC)
"the air mission was ...": Quotes should generally be attributed in the text, per general style guides (such as Chicago) and per varous Wikipedia guidelines. - Dank (push to talk) 01:50, 15 January 2013 (UTC)
Very well. Re-phrased. Hawkeye7 (talk) 03:01, 15 January 2013 (UTC)
"%": There's an argument that WP:MOSNUM would prefer "per cent", but I don't think it's all that important.
I can't see that though; WP:NUMERAL says Percentages are usually written with figures, e.g. 10 percent or 10%. It should be "per cent" btw; the article is in Australian English. (It would be moree historically accurate written in a confused jumble of Australian and American English.) Aside: do Americans write "permil" for ‰? Hawkeye7 (talk) 02:58, 15 January 2013 (UTC)
"permil" is quite rare here. WP:% in MOSNUM says: "Percent (American English) or per cent (British English) is commonly used to indicate percentages in the body of an article. The symbol % is more common in scientific or technical articles and in complex listings." - Dank (push to talk) 03:03, 15 January 2013 (UTC)
Support on prose per standard disclaimer. These are my edits. - Dank (push to talk) 02:12, 15 January 2013 (UTC)
  Comments by Cwmhiraeth - It states in the WikiCup rules "You must declare your WikiCup participation if you review another WikiCup participant's FAC" so I hereby declare it! 
 My first impression was of a very well-written article and much of the prose flows easily along. A few minor comments:
 "Nonetheless, the convoy succeeded in reaching Lae on 7 January and landing the troops, only to join in Okabe's defeat in the Battle of Wau." - To someone like me who knows little on this subject, this sentence is not self-explanatory.
Re-phrased to Nonetheless, the convoy succeeded in reaching Lae on 7 January and landing its troops, but Okabe was defeated in the Battle of Wau. Hawkeye7 (talk) 21:10, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
"In the South West Pacific, the primary mission of the Allied bomber force was interdiction of Japanese supply lines, especially the sea lanes" - "interdiction" seems a curious word to use here.
It's a highly technical term. Linked to the article. Hawkeye7 (talk) 21:10, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
"But the results of the effort against the January convoy were very disappointing." - Maybe join this sentence with the previous one so that you don't have a sentence starting with "but".
Rephrased to In the South West Pacific, a conventional strategic bombing campaign was out of the question because industrial targets in Japan were well beyond the range of even the largest strategic bombers operating from bases in Australia and New Guinea, so the primary mission of the Allied bomber force was interdiction of Japanese supply lines, especially the sea lanes. The results of the effort against the January convoy were therefore very disappointing. Hawkeye7 (talk) 21:10, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
A number of places are mentioned in the article ( Rabaul, Lae, Finschhafen etc). It would be nice to have a map showing their locations as an aid to understanding the account. The present maps are low resolution, in Japanese and limited to Japanese vessel movements. Ideally the map would show where the American air bases were located, where the convoy was when attacked etc. Cwmhiraeth (talk) 11:08, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
The map is in English as well as Japanese. Allied air attacks are marked in read. added this to the caption. The points where the Japanese convoy were attacked are marked in red with the dates and times. Hawkeye7 (talk) 21:10, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
What you say may be correct but the print is miniscule and the red lines difficult to distinguish. A better map would improve the article. Cwmhiraeth (talk) 06:52, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
  Quick comment -- I don't know yet if I'll review in detail and therefore recuse myself from delegate duties but, hedging my bets, I did spot one thing at a quick glance: Joe Hewitt's involvement (as No. 9 Group commander after Garing had done the RAAF planning and departed) either needs to be cited in the infobox or mentioned in the main body and cited there. You might want to check if any other data in the infobox isn't cited elsewhere... Cheers, Ian Rose (talk) 07:41, 29 January 2013 (UTC) 
 I have added a bit about the command arrangements in New Guinea, thereby mentioning Joe Hewitt. I'm not sure about the rules regarding delegates and reviews, but in the past the delegates have sometimes made copius comments. Hawkeye7 (talk) 09:07, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 
 I'm a WikiCup partipant so take these with a grain of salt.
For those who don't know, Sturmvogel is leading Wikicup by a country mile. I don't think this article is eligible; all the work on it was done last year. I nommed it because the anniversary of the battle is coming up. Hawkeye7 (talk) 07:33, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
Overlinked Rabaul, New Guinea, Wewak, Imperial General Headquarters, RAAF, Fifth Air Force, Lae, Madang
Removed. Allowed for duplication between lead and body. Hawkeye7 (talk) 07:33, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
What were these Japanese high speed transports? The link goes to US converted destroyers, but did the Japanese do the same sort of thing?
Yes. Actually, the Japanese did it first, and the Americans copied them. Hawkeye7 (talk) 07:33, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
This plan was acknowledged to be risky, because Allied air power in the area was strong. The comma here looks to be unnecessary.
Should these two sentences be combined or connected? The XVIII Army staff gave the operation a 50–50 chance of success. They held war games that predicted losses of four out of ten transports, and between 30 and 40 aircraft.
No, but I have reversed their order. Hawkeye7 (talk) 07:33, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
Link aircraft carrier, fighter group, magazine, landing craft and autocannon for 20 mm cannon
Were Pappy's modifications tied to this battle or were they just serendipitous? Dates here would be helpful
Yes. Added a bit. Hawkeye7 (talk) 07:33, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
That's a bit more helpful, but a date when Pappy began his experiments would be still be useful.--Sturmvogel 66 (talk) 07:50, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
The chronology of the Allied tactics section doesn't flow well. We start with poor results from the January attack, review weaponry modifications and skip-bombing tactics, presumably both already in practice and then review the available Allied air units. I'd have to think more for a suggestion on how exactly to fix this, but it does need fixing.
I think it flows quite nicely. The point is that Kenney was trying new ideas. Hawkeye7 (talk) 07:33, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
That's only partially made clear. Maybe I'm just hung up on the idea that these changes were made since the failure in January. Obviously some are like the attacks on multiple axes, but still...--Sturmvogel 66 (talk) 07:50, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
What kind of tonnage are you talking about for the Japanese transports? GRT, DWT? And what are the cubic meters for? I've never seen them used for any ship in all my readings.
Per the link, GRT. This is a unit of volume. For example, the Japanese transport Aiyo Maru was 2,746 tons (GRT) but 4,331 tons (DWT). The former is used, as it is what appears in all the sources. Hawkeye7 (talk) 07:33, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
Tell the reader up front that these are GRT. Just like you tell xe that a given ship is a destroyer or whatever; don't make xe work for it. I presume that you're converting from GRT to derive the cubic meters, but why? It seems pointless and I've never seen any source do it when dealing with wartime merchantmen or convoys. The GRT is normally all that's given.--Sturmvogel 66 (talk) 07:50, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
Well, you didn't realise that they were gross register tons. Changed the first occurrence to write it out in long hand.
I never clicked on the link to see since I was going to ask you what they were. So what's up with the cubic meters?--Sturmvogel 66 (talk) 08:15, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
Do you think they should be removed? It is the common unit which all landlubbers will understand. Hawkeye7 (talk) 08:41, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
I suspect that you're overthinking here; readers may not understand confuse GRT and displacement, but they can easily understand the ratios between the tonnages to know relative sizes of the ships. Which is all that's really necessary unless they're the quartermaster in charge of loading those selfsame ships. So, yes, please delete the cubic meters.--Sturmvogel 66 (talk) 17:58, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
Hey, I resemble that remark! Deleted. Hawkeye7 (talk) 20:38, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
This seem kind of redundant unless there were naval troops involved: army troops
Yes, there were. See the OrBat for details. Hawkeye7 (talk) 07:33, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
Because of the conditional "if" at the start of the sentence, shouldn't "maximised" be "would maximise"? If the ships turned to face them, the standard procedure in case of a torpedo attack, the Beaufighters maximised the damage they inflicted on the ships' anti-aircraft guns, bridges and crews in strafing
This seems a bit awkward: Tokitsukaze was also hit and fatally damaged, and later sank
tautology. Deleted "later sank". Hawkeye7 (talk) 07:33, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
Howabout adding "also" in front of "collided"? The destroyer Arashio was hit, and collided with the transport Nojima, disabling her
This reads oddly, but it may just be the difference between US and BritEng handling of collective nouns: One band of 18 landed on Kiriwina, where it was captured by PT-114
  --Sturmvogel 66 (talk) 03:21, 1 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Nominator(s): FunkMonk (talk) 16:31, 12 January 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article because I have added practically all known info about, most PD images, and presented all controversies relating to the bird, and it has also been copyedited. FunkMonk (talk) 16:31, 12 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Source review - spotchecks not done 
 FN5: publisher?
FN9, 10: formatting
Compare FNs 11 and 17. Nikkimaria (talk) 03:23, 13 January 2013 (UTC)
 
I think all these issues should be fixed now. FunkMonk (talk) 10:59, 13 January 2013 (UTC)
 Support as per my good article review. A very strong article on a very interesting topic. J Milburn (talk) 22:40, 13 January 2013 (UTC)
 
I do not understand why a Good Article review can be compatible with a Featured Article review, so I do not understand your rationale of referring back to your Good Article review. Snowman (talk) 12:59, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
As I said in my good article review, I felt the article was pretty much ready for FA status then. I find that the best good article reviews point towards FAC, and I try to do that in many of my own reviews; in this case, there was nothing else I could say. I read through the article again, and was happy that it was ready. I was also declaring a possible conflict of interest so that delegates could take that into account, if they felt it important. Do you now understand why I referred back to my good article review? (As an aside, why are you feeling the need to pester those who supported? It isn't like major issues have been dug up in subsequent reviews; a few small pointers have been brought up, along with some suggestions that aren't so great. Certainly nothing that suggests that the article is incomplete.) J Milburn (talk) 19:27, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Please withdraw the suggestion that I have pestered those supporting this article. Snowman (talk) 21:23, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Please stop pestering me... J Milburn (talk) 10:56, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
See Wikipedia:Administrators' noticeboard/Incidents. Snowman (talk) 13:24, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Sheesh! Why so serious? FunkMonk (talk) 14:29, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
 Images are fine; all PD. A few are not Commons-safe, but they are uploaded locally and appropriately tagged. J Milburn (talk) 22:40, 13 January 2013 (UTC)
Support I made a couple of minor edits, please check Jimfbleak - talk to me? 15:04, 16 January 2013 (UTC)
 
I have noticed a tendency for you to support FA promotion early in the FA discussion of articles about birds; however, this is generally followed by lists of issues found by subsequent reviewers. Snowman (talk) 13:09, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
Personally, my thoughts about articles are rarely the same as those of other reviewers. I review with content, not style, in mind. As you can see below, interpretation is quite individual and subjective. FunkMonk (talk) 18:13, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
I think that reviewers bring a variety of skills and knowledge hence improvements to articles usually follow. Snowman (talk) 21:13, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
Perhaps you should also consider whether you yourself make FA reviews more nitpicky and tedious than necessary. You frequently confuse guidelines with policy, as well as elevating your own (often eccentric) personal preferences to FA criteria. You also make blanket announcements of wanting "large changes", without actually specifying what it is you dislike. That is useless handwaving. And even when one of your subjective, non-FAC criterion suggestions are rejected, you stubbornly refuse to let them go. Sometimes it appears like you haven't even read the articles to begin with, since what you ask for is often already present, or is a complete misinterpretation. I say this from experience. Compare the length and tediousness of these two FACs where you contributed:[54][55] With these where you didn't:[56][57] FunkMonk (talk) 14:57, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Everyone is welcome to their own views and opinions. I have started discussions on the talk pages of Talk:Rodrigues Solitaire and Talk:Dodo about problems with verification that I think should have been fixed during FA discussions. Snowman (talk) 16:29, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Yes, but it is always good to take evaluation of one's behaviour into account, especially when the same issues are noticed by many different people over and over again. FunkMonk (talk) 16:37, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
 [edit] Review by SandyGeorgia 
 Oppose for now, expect to strike, multiple 
 The Réunion Ibis (Threskiornis solitarius) is ... if the Threskiornis solitarius is an alternate name, it should be both bolded and italicized.
This isn't done on other featured animal species articles, see for example California Condor, Lion, Bald Eagle, and Emperor Penguin. FunkMonk (talk) 22:35, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
Yes, I agree. AFAIK all the 100+ bird FAs and the thousands of bird species articles follow this practice Jimfbleak - talk to me? 07:05, 18 January 2013 (UTC)
Alternate common names are emboldened in bird articles, but not binomial names. I understand that this style was thought to be the tidiest by consensus; although, all alternate names might logically be expected to be emboldened. Snowman (talk) 13:37, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
Yes, but then again, I don't see why this article should be the first to break the mold. FunkMonk (talk) 23:28, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
Well, that's not right, but not worth dealing with if they've all been doing it wrong for a long time. SandyGeorgia (Talk) 20:28, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
I doubt you'll find any article about a taxon with a common name that doesn't do it this way. See the guideline here:[58] Scientific names are only bolded if the animal does not have a common name, for whatever reason. See for example Deinosuchus. FunkMonk (talk) 20:53, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
We had a discussion on this very point some time ago (link) and the consensus was to leave the scientific name unbolded in parentheses. Casliber (talk · contribs) 13:30, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Thank you, Cas! SandyGeorgia (Talk) 06:50, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Images are facing off the page ... I believe the intent of the MOS guideline applies to both animals and people ... please juggle images so animals aren't looking off the page.
I don't think that looks good, it creates clutter of images on the right side. Again, it is just a guideline for faces, not an FA criterion. Tons of other animal FAs have images that face away from the text. The problem would be the long synonym list, not the quotes. The guideline specifically says: "It is often preferable to place images of faces so that the face or eyes look toward the text. However, images of people need not be reversed simply to make the person's face point towards the text, and this should not be done if the reversal would materially mislead the viewer (e.g., by making the subject of the article or section appear to have a birthmark on the left side of his face, when the birthmark is actually on the right side)."[59] FunkMonk (talk) 20:42, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
Restore bullet point AGAIN. SandyGeorgia (Talk) 20:44, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
Well, sorry, but remember, no one is doing this to annoy you, I've just never dealt with this manner of responding before. FunkMonk (talk) 20:47, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
Move it back if you wish; I'm not going to tangle over one image. But a) there is no such thing as "clutter of images on the right", and b) I suggest the clutter here is the excess number of quote boxes. SandyGeorgia (Talk) 20:46, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
I added the MOS guideline above. As for quote boxes, I don't see what they have to do with anything? An image can be right aligned even if there's a box. The problem is that the taxobox has a long list of synonyms, which makes it intrude far down. I've fixed it by making the list collabsible and then right aligned the image in question.FunkMonk (talk) 20:49, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
The point about "clutter" was that images weren't cluttering, but excess quotes might be. SandyGeorgia (Talk) 06:50, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
In the mid 19th century, ... missing hyphen, pls review throughout.
Fixed the single occurrence. FunkMonk (talk) 22:38, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
An alternate name is mentioned in the second paragraph; is it not possible to get that mentioned sooner?
Mentioned a bit sooner. FunkMonk (talk) 22:53, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
The taxonomic history of the Réunion Ibis is very convoluted, ... is there a difference between "very convoluted" and "convoluted"? Please check for redundancy.
Removed "very". FunkMonk (talk) 22:36, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
It has been claimed that Bertrand-François Mahé de La Bourdonnais sent a "Solitaire" to France ... weasly ... by whom?
It is attributed to Billiard, 1822, but I'm not sure who it is. Added the name. FunkMonk (talk) 22:49, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
  Just random checks, I stopped there, the article is not in bad shape, but some additional prose review would be helpful. SandyGeorgia (Talk) 22:31, 17 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Feel free to propose more changes if necessary. FunkMonk (talk) 22:40, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
  I've restored my bullet points (please look at my edit summaries to understand how to preserve numbering on response); I use bullet points so that you can enter one response, referencing numbers, to help avoid insanely long FACs (which seem to be the trend of late). SandyGeorgia (Talk) 20:30, 22 January 2013 (UTC) 
 I have no idea who removed the bullets, must be in the edit history somewhere. FunkMonk (talk) 20:36, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
You did: [60] This is how you respond to bullet points: [61] But you can shorten the FAC by adding a one-para response below, referencing my numbers. As in, 1, 3 and 5 fixed. Brief-- no need for FACs longer than articles because of threaded minutaie. SandyGeorgia (Talk) 20:41, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
Alright, wasn't my intention then. But note that my FAC's only get longer than the articles themselves when Snowman drops by. He usually has a lot to say (and I personally have no problem with long FACs). See the Dodo and Mauritius Blue Pigeon discussions for comparison, where he did not chime in. FunkMonk (talk) 20:43, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
Are there any ready-made statistics on FAC lengths? Snowman (talk) 14:03, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
  I agree with Snowmanradio that this article is hard to follow, and suggest clarity can be added right here in the lead: 
 In the late 20th century, the discovery of a subfossil species of ibis led to the idea that the accounts actually referred to this bird.
  The accounts of the Reunion Solitaires? "This bird" equals the Reunion Ibis? Too much confusion about which bird is which, I think can be tightened in this one sentence in the lead. Clarify "the accounts" and clarify "this bird". "The accounts" refers apparently to the previous para. SandyGeorgia (Talk) 20:38, 22 January 2013 (UTC) SandyGeorgia (Talk) 20:38, 22 January 2013 (UTC) 
 
Done. All your issues should be fixed now. FunkMonk (talk) 20:53, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
Thank you, I've struck my oppose as I've not got time for further review. SandyGeorgia (Talk) 06:53, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Cool. FunkMonk (talk) 07:18, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 [edit] Review by Snowmanradio 
 I found this article somewhat difficult to read, so I suspect that the prose needs copy editing and perhaps the article needs reorganisation. Other issues: Snowman (talk) 13:26, 21 January 2013 (UTC) 
 
It has been copyedited already. Feel free to propose changes here. FunkMonk (talk) 18:06, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
I am anticipating that a number of reviewers will contribute to many improvements. Snowman (talk) 19:23, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
Let's hope so, but since you express you have something specific to mind, might as well brig it up. FunkMonk (talk) 21:31, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
 I find the use of "Solitare" confusing, since the word solitaire can mean different things. Presumably the word should not be capitalised. Snowman (talk) 13:26, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Exactly when it is capitalised, it should be clearer that it is a name. FunkMonk (talk) 18:06, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
Réunion Solitaire or Rodrigues Solitaire? Snowman (talk) 19:21, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
The Rodrigues bird is referred to only by its full name, and only in the taxonomy section. I'm not sure who would be confused. FunkMonk (talk) 21:31, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
I think that understanding what is meant by Solitaire (with a capital S) added to my difficulty of reading the article. The heading is "Réunion Ibis" (the IOC and IUCN name) and I am not sure why it needs to be called a solitaire at any time except for saying that it is an alternative common name. Snowman (talk) 11:11, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
When old accounts that use "Solitaire" are referred to, it would be too presumptuous to write "ibis" in the text. As stated below, the Ibis and Solitaire can never be shown to be the same entity without doubt. See how Birdlife International cautiously terms it: "If the Réunion 'solitaires' were indeed T. solitarius" and "It seems likely that the 'solitaire' known from numerous early accounts from Réunion(Cheke 1987) and Rodrigues, Mauritius, was in fact this ibis" FunkMonk (talk) 13:22, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Unresolved. Snowman (talk) 20:29, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Or rather, rejected. You have not responded to my arguments above. FunkMonk (talk) 20:45, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
It is Sand Martin and House Martin. The House Martin is a martin that makes mud nests. Martin is a lower case here. It is Reuniun Solitaire, but why should "Solitaire" be capitalised? Snowman (talk) 21:27, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
"Solitaire" was the common name for this species at the time, I don't see what it has to do with "martin", which refers to a type of bird today, and such names are not capitalised. A "solitaire" is not a type of bird. FunkMonk (talk) 21:39, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Check and Hume 2004 (one of the main sources) use "solitaire" 46 times in their article. It is all lower case 44 times, all upper case once in a heading, and it is capitalised only once where it is in a quote from 1897. Snowman (talk) 23:16, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
Alright, good precedent. Does this include the full common name "Réunion Solitaire" as well, or is that name even used by them? FunkMonk (talk) 23:18, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
Common names of birds are usually capitalised. Why is solitaire in inverted commas in "connected to the "solitaire" accounts."? The infobox seems inconsistent, because it is headed Reunion Ibis and the image is captioned Reunion Solitaire. Snowman (talk) 23:37, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
Removed the quote marks. Schlegel did not know of any ibis when he drew the image based on accounts (he placed it in the genus Didus in the same article), so retroactively labelling it a such is not needed. See also the caption at King Island Emu. The original terminology is of historical importance. FunkMonk (talk) 00:30, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 The term "Réunion Ibis Solitaire" appears once and I do not know what this is supposed to indicate. Snowman (talk) 13:26, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Fixed, seems to have been added during copyediting. FunkMonk (talk) 18:06, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
 In the introduction; "Therefore, the Réunion Solitaire was classified as a member of the pigeon subfamily Raphinae, and even placed in the same genus as the Dodo by some authors." This is like saying "Therefore, the Earth was thought to be flat", without putting it in context. Snowman (talk) 13:26, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
 
The context is given prior to the sentence you quote. You took it out of its context yourself. FunkMonk (talk) 18:06, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
I think that this sentence should clearly say that it is an out-of-date point of view. Snowman (talk) 19:21, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
I'll try to tweak it. But it seems a bit redundant, since the sentence is preceded by "were incorrectly assumed to refer to white relatives of the Dodo" FunkMonk (talk) 21:31, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
 "Dod-eersen" this appears in an old quote. I would not expect many readers to understand this unless they were interested in Dodos and old Dutch journals from ships. Snowman (talk) 13:26, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Hence the explanation prior to the quote. But I'll clarify it. FunkMonk (talk) 18:06, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
It see the amendment, but is is clear? Snowman (talk) 21:02, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
What do you think? FunkMonk (talk) 21:31, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
I am not entirely sure how a new reader would see this, because I am aware that "Dod-eersen" can refer to a Dodo in old ship journals. However, I expect that this odd old Dutch word would add to the difficulty in reading the article for many. What about using an explanatory footnote? Snowman (talk) 11:33, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
I'll give it some square brackets then, more likely to be viewed by a reader than a footnote. FunkMonk (talk) 13:09, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
 In bird articles the description section generally occurs earlier in the article than seen here, and it may help to follow suite in this article. Snowman (talk) 13:26, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
 
They don't, the taxonomy and evolution sections are always first, here they're just longer than average, since that's basically most there is to say about the bird. Can you show me any bird FAs where these sections aren't first? See also my examples above, which also have the same structure. FunkMonk (talk) 18:06, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
This article does not have an evolution section, but a re-organisation to include a section on evolution would probably be helpful. This article has a section headed "Modern identification", before the description heading. Snowman (talk) 19:40, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
The identity issue is obviously part of the taxonomy. Could as well be called "modern taxonomic interpretation" or similar. I can rename it, or simply merge the sections, whatever you like. Moving it further down wouldn't make sense. We need an explanation and disclaimer before "merging" the entities in the lower sections. FunkMonk (talk) 21:31, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
It might be clearer to separate "historical confusion" from "modern nomenclature and taxonomy". Snowman (talk) 21:56, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
Yes, perhaps with taxonomy as heading, and two subheadings. I'll try something out. FunkMonk (talk) 22:15, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
I think that it would be worth putting the description section earlier, since the taxonomy section is rather long and complicated. Snowman (talk) 11:11, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
In this case, I think it is a bad idea. The description and behaviour sections are pretty much a scientific synthesis of facts about the fossil ibis and the old Solitaire accounts, a thorough explanation is needed before the reader gets to that section. And a brief description is also given in the taxonomy section, already. FunkMonk (talk) 13:16, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Perhaps, the redundancy of repeating a description in the taxonomy can be avoided by putting the description section higher up the page. This issue may not affect FA status. Snowman (talk) 20:29, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
The first description featured is in an old quote, so the redundancy is not in the text itself. FunkMonk (talk) 20:45, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
 Article inconsistency: The article says; "No specimens of the bird were ever collected." It then goes on to say that two were sent to France (but did not survive) and that Billiard claimed that Bertrand-François Mahé de La Bourdonnais sent another to France. Snowman (talk) 20:55, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
 
They were sent, but died on the ship, and the remains weren't preserved. So perhaps it should be "no specimens were ever preserved". "Collected" was used in the source. As for the one bird, the article explains why this was most likely not a Réunion Solitaire. FunkMonk (talk) 21:31, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
I think that you can see the problem. Snowman (talk) 21:51, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
 Possible omission: the African origin of this ibis. See the subsection "Madagascar: African affinities" in Cheke and Hume (2008). This could feature in a new subsection headed "Evolution". The Wiki article says a close relative is "... the Straw-necked Ibis (T. spinicollis) of Australia." However, Cheke and Hume distances the Reunion Ibis from the Australian ibis saying that they "relate best to African forms.Snowman (talk) 21:25, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
 
I don't think it's enough for an entire section, but could be mentioned near the part about its closest relatives in the identity subsection. As for Hume's claim that's it's closer related to the African form, the actual describers of the bird makes no such claim, and Hume doesn't seem to go into detail about why. FunkMonk (talk) 21:31, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
The Cheke and Hume paper says that the Reunion Ibis clearly has an African origin and is descended from Malagasy forms. Going on this, I think that the article might have the wrong emphasis in saying that its closest relatives are the African Ibis (from Africa) and the Straw-necked Ibis (from Australia). Some of the other Ibises of the same genus are also mainly black and white, so the article's emphasis of the black and white colour of those two ibises does not make sense to me. It is difficult to know what to do when different authorities have different opinions; however, there is no ambiguity in Cheke and Hume, who say "clearly has an African origin", so why ignore it. Snowman (talk) 21:48, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
The thing is, the actual describers, Mourer-Chauviré and Moutou did a cladistic analysis, where those two species were found to be about equally close to the Réunion bird. Ther Australian one is even closer in one feature: "In T. solitarius the minor and major metacarpals are fused over a longer distance, at both proximal and distal extremities, than in T. aethiopicus, but the same is true in T. spinicollis". I'm not sure what Cheke and Hume base their conclusions on, and they've already been proved wrong with their interpretation of Mascarinus as a psittaculine, for example. FunkMonk (talk) 21:57, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
Mourer-Chauviré and Moutou (1987) or Cheke and Hume (2008)? What is the preference for a 1987 paper over a 2008 paper? Snowman (talk) 22:08, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
I'm referring to the 1999 paper. Morphological analysis is more reliable than guesswork and assumptions, I'd say. Only genetic testing can make sure, as the Mascarinus case clearly shows. Should be possible some day, and until then, the African hypothesis doesn't warrant more than the sentence I've given it. Especially since many Mascarene birds actually seem to have an Asian origin. FunkMonk (talk) 22:13, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
The Mascarene Parrot has an African origin closely related to the Lesser Vasa Parrot from Madagascar (2012 genetic study). Snowman (talk) 22:29, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
Whereas Cheke and Hume proposed an Asian origin, only to be proven wrong a few years later. The Dodo and Rodrigues Solitaire, on the other hand, have been shown to be of Asian origin, through genetic analysis. The jury is still out on the Red Rail. In any case, the following should be enough: "The African Sacred Ibis also has similar coloured plumage to that described in the old descriptions of the Réunion Solitaire. It may be closer to that species, and therefore of African origin." FunkMonk (talk) 22:35, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
But the article indicates that "the Straw-necked Ibis (T. spinicollis) of Australia." is its second closest relative and the section that I have read in Cheke and Hume does not imply this. Cheke and Hume indicates that ibises on Reunion are "clearly related to African forms". The only relevant in-line reference is to Cheke and Hume. If you have used information from Mourer-Chauviré and Moutou (1999), then it should be included as an in-line reference here. Snowman (talk) 22:52, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
I see, I moved the 1995 reference forward, which says the same. FunkMonk (talk) 23:03, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
I suggest a spot check on randomly selected text for missing in-line references. Snowman (talk) 23:15, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
Actually, I don't see how the sentence implies more than the Cheke Hume source. It simply lists the two birds, without claiming anything in regard to closest relation. So it was fine even before. FunkMonk (talk) 23:17, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
Where does it say in Cheke and Hume specifically that the Straw-necked Ibis is so closely related? The statement in Cheke and Hume "clearly related to African forms" seems to contradict that the Straw-necked Ibis of Australia is very closely related. Snowman (talk) 11:11, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
See the box on page 103. But that's irrelevant now, since the citation has been changed. FunkMonk (talk) 13:09, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
This box is not used as an in-line reference. Has information for the article been sourced from this box? Snowman (talk) 20:50, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Again, I replaced the citation. FunkMonk (talk) 21:14, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
 This ibis is not a white dodo, so why are there so many images of a white Dodo in the article. Two of the images of a white Dodo look similar. I think that the images of the white Dodo are excessive. Snowman (talk) 22:01, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
 
The two 1600s paintings were directly responsible for the entire white Dodo myth, so I don't think so. The Frohawk image shows how embedded and accepted the idea was in 19th century literature, so it is important too. The latter is also so frequently republished that it is good to finally point out here that it is actually based on nothing, even I thought it depicted an actual specimen before I read up on the bird some years ago. I agree that such images should not be used outside the taxonomy sections, but they aren't anyway. FunkMonk (talk) 22:04, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
There are four images showing a white Dodo, but the ibis is not a white Dodo. The captions do not explain the confusion over the white Dodo and I think the captions are not adequate. Why does the article need the image captioned; "Frohawk's 1907 adaptation of the Withoos Dodo"? Snowman (talk) 11:36, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Again, the ibis is not a Dodo, but the Solitaire was thought to be. They were believed to be different entities until recently. We can never be sure if they represented the same bird. But I'll expand the captions. FunkMonk (talk) 13:16, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Why not make another article for Reunion Solitaire (Raphus solitarius)? Snowman (talk) 20:38, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
We can never be sure if the "Du" of New Caledonian legend actually is Sylviornis. But I doubt anyone would ever create a separate "Du" article, since the likelihood of them being the same is so large. Same in this case. Remember, there are several entities within the "Solitaire" complex that could warrant articles if we took it that far: The Ibis, the white Dodo, the white Rodrigues Solitaire, and the Réunion Solitaire itself. FunkMonk (talk) 21:14, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
 Omission: dates of the images in captions. Snowman (talk) 22:57, 21 January 2013 (UTC)
 
I'll give the estimated dates, the 1600s paintings have not been dated exactly. FunkMonk (talk) 23:03, 21 January 2013 (UTC))
 In the introduction "... and the bird was first described in 1987." This sounds odd, because there are images of the bird dating back to about 1600 in the article. Snowman (talk) 20:50, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Should be scientifically described. And in any case, no contemporary images of the actual Solitaire exist. The white Dodos are likely just albinistic Mauritius birds, as ther article states. FunkMonk (talk) 21:14, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
 In the introduction "raphine"; jargon. Snowman (talk) 20:59, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
 
That's what members of raphinae are called. There is no other term. FunkMonk (talk) 21:14, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
... that does not make it easy-to-underdstand jargon. Snowman (talk) 22:51, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
When it is preceded by "the Réunion Solitaire was long believed to be a member of the pigeon subfamily Raphinae", what else could it possibly mean? I don't think we need to underestimate the intellect of the readers. FunkMonk (talk) 22:55, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
"Raphinae" is also jargon. An intelligent person may wonder why the introduction is written by using two different words (which both turn out to indicate the same sub-family). It certainly would make it more difficult to read by some. We are looking for simplification in the introduction, so use anything possible to make it easier to read. Why not write it differently and only use one word for the subfamily. Make the introduction easy to read, clear, and unambiguous. Snowman (talk) 23:16, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
I suggest you take a look at our featured dinosaur articles[62][63][64], which use similar terms. There is no common name for this family, unlike many other bird families. This article, and many others about extinct birds, have more in common with those covered by the palaeontology project. FunkMonk (talk) 23:27, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
The readability issue of having two different words of jargon in the introduction and both indicate the same sub-family is unresolved. Snowman (talk) 23:37, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Raphidae is the subfamily. A "raphine" is a member of that subfamily. Just like a "tyrannosaurid" is a member of Tyrannosauridae. There is no issue to resolve, unless our goal is to dumb down the article. That's what simple Wikipedia is for. FunkMonk (talk) 23:55, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
I fixed it myself by saying "this subfamily" instead of "raphine". Snowman (talk) 20:29, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
 In the introduction "wiped-out"; probably unconventional language in science. Might be difficult to read by people who have a non-English first language. Snowman (talk) 20:59, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
 
That is one of the weirdest arguments I've ever read in a FAC. This article is written for English speakers. This is the English Wikipedia. My first language isn't English, yet I don't have a problem understanding what I write here. FunkMonk (talk) 21:14, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
My only language is English and "wipe out" sounds odd to me as used in the introduction. Of course, I know what wipeout (wikilink to a dab page) means, however I think that "extinct" should be written in instead, because this would be more conventional and precise. Snowman (talk) 22:17, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
I worded it a bit more eloquently. I think "wipe out" is crude, rather than hard to understand. FunkMonk (talk) 22:25, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
I think that I was entirely correct in pointing to this problem and suggesting a sensible improvement. Snowman (talk) 22:45, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Whatever the cause, I think the present wording is indeed better. FunkMonk (talk) 22:50, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
 Wiped out occurs in "had wiped out the wildlife in the lowlands". I think that you should have realised that this phase appears in the article more than once. Snowman (talk) 00:13, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Why? You only brought up the intro. The same term is used in the source, so I don't see why it should be replaced throughout. FunkMonk (talk) 00:21, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
I think that an alternative word would be better than wiped out. Did cats wipe out all wildlife in the lowlands? Did they wipe out all animals, birds, fish and reptiles in the lowlands? An added complexity is the wildlife can also mean vegetation. Snowman (talk) 00:37, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
The source says both "wildlife" and "wipe out". I don't think it's up to us to reinterpret the sources and give info a potentially different meaning. FunkMonk (talk) 00:52, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Unresolved. Snowman (talk) 01:22, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Or rather something you don't personally like, which has no relevance to actual FAC criteria. This is getting silly, could we please stick to constructive criticism that is based on actual FAC criteria so this page doesn't get longer than the last one? FunkMonk (talk) 01:29, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
I think that you are on thin ice here. How can feral cats wipe out wildlife in the lowlands? Surely, they must have left some forms of wildlife to exist there. Snowman (talk) 01:42, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Ask Cheke and Hume. Anywhow, just to get the ball rolling, I've written "decimated the wildlife" instead, also sounds fancier. FunkMonk (talk) 01:47, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
I think that you see the problem. Personally speaking, I think that "decimated" is not the right word here. Decimate has more than one meaning. It could mean reduce by a tenth (as also used in Roman times) or severely reduce. Snowman (talk) 13:49, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
It's more that, at this point, I just want to get on with it. So what do you suggest? FunkMonk (talk) 14:27, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
I have fixed it myself using "last stronghold" and "feral cats hunted wildlife". I note that User FunkMonk made an improvement based on my version. Snowman (talk) 20:57, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
 In the introduction "... merely showed an aberrant Mauritius Dodo." This can not be left like this in the introduction, since readers who only read the introduction are likely to get the wrong impression and have no idea that the white Dodo could be a normal juvenile Dodo (or a normal female). Snowman (talk) 21:04, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
 
It has never been suggested it was white because it was a female. And aberrant merely means different from the norm, which is of course a grey Dodo. FunkMonk (talk) 21:16, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
I have seen discussion about the white Dodo including that it could be a normal juvenile. I recall that the discussion also included that it could be a normal female. I think that the introduction gives the wrong impression and needs amending. In many bird species young juvenile birds are a different colour to the adult bird and this does not make the young bird aberrant. See the section on the White Dodo in the Dodo article, which mentions the possibility of a white Dodo being a female or a juvenile. Snowman (talk) 22:23, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
I've changed it. As for the Dodo article, since I wrote it in the first place, I know that you've misinterpreted it. The sex dimorphism theory was to explain why the images showed yellow wings instead of black as in the accounts, it has nothing to do with the white colour. FunkMonk (talk) 22:25, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
A white Dodo might be a normal juvenile Dodo. Snowman (talk) 22:45, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
It might, but note also that the Dodo in this[65] painting has been speculated to be juvenile, and it isn't particularly white. FunkMonk (talk) 22:50, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Both images could be correct depending on what age they change colour. Snowman (talk) 23:00, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Well, either is really irrelevant now, since the wording has already been changed. FunkMonk (talk) 23:02, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
 I have listed a sample of problems in the introduction above. It may be necessary for the introduction to have a complete re-write. Snowman (talk) 21:06, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Only if you point out exactly what needs to be rewritten. Not all these suggestions are particularly usable. FunkMonk (talk) 21:16, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
My point that I am making is that I have found a number of factors in the introduction that make it difficult to read and perhaps some parts could be misleading. I have listed a few problems from the introduction to point authors of the article in what I think is the right direction. Snowman (talk) 22:17, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Replacing a few words hardly counts as a "complete rewrite". FunkMonk (talk) 22:25, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
A few things in the introduction have been improved. However, I think that the introduction continues to have readability issues. I think it may be best for new reviewers to have a look. Snowman (talk) 22:45, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Well, if the issues are so obvious and striking, they shouldn't be too hard to point out, no? FunkMonk (talk) 22:50, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
I think I have helped to unscramble some of the factual content of the introduction. Some people are really good and quick at copy-editing and I would rather hand over to a copy-editor to handle the complexities of the English language relevant to the introduction at this juncture. Snowman (talk) 23:00, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Alright. But note that it has already been copyedited, and that no one else seem to be this confused by the intro so far. FunkMonk (talk) 23:02, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
SandyGeorgia has commented on the introduction (or lead); see this edit. Snowman (talk) 23:22, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
All her suggestions were subsequently fixed, so that is hardly relevant now. But anyhow, let's wait and see, if you don't have more suggestions yourself. FunkMonk (talk) 23:29, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Have you noticed that she is currently opposing FA status? Snowman (talk) 23:44, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
She hasn't responded since I fixed the issues, so I'm not sure why it should come as a surprise. FunkMonk (talk) 23:55, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Unresolved. Snowman (talk) 00:57, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Eh, what is unresolved? You have not proposed any changes in this section. FunkMonk (talk) 01:05, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
I have listed above a sample of issues in the introduction and I am anticipating that editors will be proactive and fix other problems like it in the introduction. I also think that the introduction is too long (see below) mainly because of too much detail on old taxonomy and old nomenclature. Snowman (talk) 01:17, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Problem is, the bulk of literature about this bird is about old taxonomy and interpretations, since there is practically nothing else known about the bird. You can't expect this article to have a different focus than all actual published literature about the subject, that is pretty absurd. FunkMonk (talk) 01:22, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Also, since the intro is supposed to be a summary of the entire article, the space given to taxonomic history is appropriate, since more than half of the article itself is about this. FunkMonk (talk) 01:58, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
There is no perfect introduction, but a suspect few more improvements can be made and I hope more reviewers have a look. Snowman (talk) 20:29, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
 Introduction length: My impression is that there is too much detail in the introduction particularly on old taxonomy and nomenclature, so I decided to look at WP:LEADLENGTH. It suggests that an article of 15,000–30,000 characters should aim to have two or three paragraphs in the introduction. Currently article readable prose size (text only) is 16 kB (2725 words) and the introduction has four paragraphs. Snowman (talk) 00:26, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
 
I disagree, the taxonomic history is very important in this case. Unless someone else chimes in and complains about it, I think it's fine. FunkMonk (talk) 00:47, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Unresolved. Snowman (talk) 00:53, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
You haven't suggested anything that is actually in the FA criteria. The intro to article ratio is just a guideline, not a criterion. Likewise, the detail issue is subjective. Drastic changes that are not obvious improvements, like many of those you propose, should at least have more support from other reviewers before I'll consider them. FunkMonk (talk) 00:56, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
After actually looking at the guideline, there is only a suggestion of how long the intro should be in relation to the article, not how short. So your demand is misleading. FunkMonk (talk) 01:00, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
I am aware that the suggested introduction are guidelines, but I suspected that there was too much difficult-to-read detail in the introduction before I reminded myself of the length guidelines. I recall some FA discussions that were the catalyst for editors to go to a lot of trouble to get the introduction to an appropriate size. Snowman (talk) 01:10, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
But what you propose has nothing to do with the actual guideline. The guideline doesn't indicate the intro should be shorter. It is about the minimum length of intros in relation to text, not maximum. FunkMonk (talk) 01:13, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
"The appropriate length of the lead section depends on the total length of the article". See WP:LEADLENGTH. Snowman (talk) 01:19, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Immediately followed by "As a general guideline—not an absolute rule", while linking to "Ignore all rules". You're a bit selective with your quotes there. It is by no means a FAC criterion, that should be pretty clear, and has no bearing on whether this article should pass or fail. FunkMonk (talk) 01:27, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
As far as I can see, the introduction is quite a bit longer than the guidelines suggest, so this is a relevant talking point here. Snowman (talk) 00:00, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
 
The important thing about the lead is that it summarises, in the correct proportion, the key points of the article. Its precise length or paragraph count is secondary to this. It is far better for a lead to be slightly too long than, as in most cases, far too short. In a perfect world the two paragraphs which deal with taxonomy would be merged and slightly shortened while the end of the last paragraph would be split to a new, slightly extended one on ecology, habitat and extinction, but this is a matter of slight sentence-shuffling: FA-class is not reserved for perfect articles. Chris Cunningham (user:thumperward) (talk) 14:47, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
 
^See, that is a constructive suggestion, with tangible pointers instead of hand-waving. I'll see what I can do. FunkMonk (talk) 14:51, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
I have now reworked the intro, following the specific and helpful suggestions made by Thumperward. FunkMonk (talk) 16:33, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
I am grateful for User Thumperward's suggestions, which are very likely to be useful for fixing readability issues that I have raised. I think User Thumperward's has expressed his insight eloquently. Snowman (talk) 16:54, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Yes. The reason why it was impossible to implement it when you suggested it was that you mixed up two unrelated issues, length and content, without actually pointing out anything specific in the text. Please be a bit more concise with your suggestions henceforward. That is the "blanket statement" problem I mentioned above, which you need to take seriously if your reviews are to be of any use. FunkMonk (talk) 17:12, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
I note your request to be spoon fed. Nevertheless, I think that general comments can be received well by pro-active Wikipedians with an open mind. I make general comments and specific comments. I have a background is science, and I prefer to leave systematic copy editing of the English language and most MoS issues to editors who specialise in these areas. 19:38, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
That statement is a bit incongruent with this[66] edit. Expressing oneself concisely has nothing to do with "spoon-feeding". That is quite an important quality to have on a text based project like this. Again, handwaving is nothing but a waste of time. I won't make drastic changes to an article if your only argument is "I don't like the intro because I don't get it", without any specific suggestions. The problem is that you don't take rejection calmly, but stubbornly attach yourself to every minor suggestion you make, as if it was core Wikipedia policy. FunkMonk (talk) 19:47, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Everyone is entitled to there own views and opinions. Snowman (talk) 20:00, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Yes, but if a change you suggest isn't an obvious improvement, but even a degradation, you have to accept if it isn't implemented, and not just label the issue as "unresolved". It is not "unresolved", it is rejected as not being an improvement, and as being irrelevant to FA criteria and Wikipedia policies. And then we can move on to the next issue, instead of argung in circles for a month every damn time. FunkMonk (talk) 20:04, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
There is no perfect introduction. After recent changes, I think that the introduction may be approaching FA standard, and I hope that more reviewers have a look at it. There seems to be repetition with both "reduced flight capabilities" and "It had difficulty flying" in the introduction, and this seems to be an example of an obvious remaining problem. Snowman (talk) 20:29, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
It is intentional. First instance refers to the old accounts, the second refers to the fossils. I'll clarify it. FunkMonk (talk) 20:54, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
I have been thinking about the length of the introduction, which now consists of four paragraphs including a double-sized second paragraph. The suggested length is two or three paragraphs for an article the size of this one. I think that the introduction needs to be simplified and shortened. I am aware that my suggestion is does not offer any specific copy-editing suggestions and that Wiki guidelines on introduction length are not strict rules, so I would welcome opinions on the length and complexity of the introduction. If there is a consensus, then editors might like to focus on more specific ways to make it easier to read and perhaps shorter. Snowman (talk) 13:37, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
As Thumperward noted above, the issue of length isn't really an FA criterion. So I don't see what would objectively be gained, other than your personal approval. FunkMonk (talk) 22:20, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
This introduction = 402 words. Free prose in entire article = 2743 words. About 14.7% of the free prose is the introduction in this article. I think that the length of the introduction is a relevant criteria to discuss in here. I note that the length of introductions is also discussed in Wikipedia:Featured article candidates/Augustinian theodicy/archive1 and Wikipedia:Featured article candidates/Aaliyah (album)/archive1. These were the first two examples that I found of long introductions that had been discussed in FA discussions and I expect that there are probably more. Snowman (talk) 23:48, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
Then we need to know how long those intros were before we can compare. In any case, it is not an FA criterion, and we have already discussed the issue at length, and reached a compromise. At this point, it's just useless ant fucking. Pardon my French. FunkMonk (talk) 00:11, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
 "seasonal fat-cycles"; jargon in the introduction. Snowman (talk) 21:31, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Then rephrase it if you don't like it, don't just remove it. FunkMonk (talk) 21:39, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
I think that your reply could be written differently. It is jargon and I do not know what it means. Unresolved. Snowman (talk) 21:52, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Have you read the article? "As contemporary accounts are inconsistent on whether the Solitaire was flightless or had some flight capability, Mourer-Chauvire suggested that this was dependent on fat-cycles; it was described as being "fat", so perhaps it could not fly when it was so, but could when it was thin." FunkMonk (talk) 22:00, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
This sounds really unusual to me. Are there any other wild birds that can not fly when they are fat and can fly when they are thin? The article says "Mourer-Chauvire suggested that this was dependent on fat-cycles", which has turned into "seasonal fat-cycles" in the introduction. There is therefore information in the introduction regarding the nature of fat-cycles (whatever they are), which is not in the text of the article. Snowman (talk) 22:18, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
Seasonal fat cycles is apparently a feature of many Mascarene birds. I think Cheke and Hume go into more detail on this. I'll add "seasonal" to the main text then. FunkMonk (talk) 22:45, 24 January 2013 (UTC)
The whole sentence is now"; Subfossil wing-bones indicate it had reduced flight capabilities, a feature perhaps linked to seasonal fat-cycles." I think that this sentence will tend to mystify readers. Surely, the most important factor linked to reduced flight capabilities is the absence of predators on the island and hence a reduced evolutionary drive to preserve flight. Snowman (talk) 13:37, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
Well, intros are not supposed to go into detail, they're mere summaries. If people are mystified, they can just read the article. FunkMonk (talk) 22:20, 26 January 2013 (UTC)
 "walghvogel"; unexplained old Dutch. Snowman (talk) 23:10, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Fixed. FunkMonk (talk) 23:18, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
Why is old Dutch needed here? Snowman (talk) 23:39, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
For colour. FunkMonk (talk) 00:30, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
I am mystified. Vogel means bird, but two on-line translators did not translate "walgh" or "walghvogel". Snowman (talk) 12:05, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
Then what? Do I need to explain the numerous etymologies for "dod-eers" too? FunkMonk (talk) 15:24, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 "As Réunion was populated, ..."; populated with what? Snowman (talk) 23:44, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Settlers, fixed. FunkMonk (talk) 00:30, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 
I've never encountered a source using these, I think it was only briefly used in the 90s, and will never be used again. FunkMonk (talk) 15:19, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
See IUCN species page for a reference for the Reunion Sacred Ibis. Snowman (talk) 16:25, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
I know, but their mere presence there doesn't mean the names are in use. They may have been used a few times each in the literature, but are abandoned now. In any case, wasn't it you who craved a shorter intro? Adding a horde of defunct names won't make it shorter. FunkMonk (talk) 16:38, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
I think that readers who arrive on the page via redirects will be helped by including these alternate names in the introduction (which needs simplification in my opinion). Snowman (talk) 16:51, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
I doubt anyone would even search for those names. They could perhaps be mentioned in the article, but again, I know of no literature that use them or explain them. FunkMonk (talk) 07:14, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
See The Sixth Extinction website, which only uses Réunion Sacred Ibis, Réunion Flightless Ibis as English common names. Snowman (talk) 13:37, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
The sacred part could be added, I'm not so sure with "flightless". FunkMonk (talk) 16:42, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
I would agree. Of course, "flightless" may be a misnomer. Snowman (talk) 18:55, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 "Since Réunion was not visited by Europeans until 1635, the 1611 painting could not have shown a bird from there.[17]"; See in "Flightless Birds" by Clive Roots. 2006. page 189. It says Portuguese saw the ibis in 1613. Snowman (talk) 15:13, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 
That is so incorrect that it hardly warrants a comment. First of all, Francois Leguat coined the name for the Rodrigues bird after the Réunion species decades later, the author seems to be misinterpreting or citing outdated sources. Below he gives an equally incorrect account of the Broad-billed Parrot. FunkMonk (talk) 15:19, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
"Since Réunion was not visited by Europeans until 1635, ..."; the en-Wiki and fr-Wiki articles on Réunion also says that Portugese visited the island before 1635 and these parts of the Wiki articles are referenced. Snowman (talk) 16:38, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
I removed it, the source was a bad summary of another paper which did not make the exact same claim. FunkMonk (talk) 00:39, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 Why not quote Dubois directly from page 170 of his book? I might be wrong, but it seems to me that there may be slightly different ways to translate certain parts of the quote. For example, his book does not mention a "Turkey-chicks", as far as I can determine. It also seems to say "one of the best game" and not "It is the best game", but I am not very good on the French language and used on-line translators. Snowman (talk) 16:46, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 
I'll check the date issue out. As for the quote, I'd rather use more complete quotes in authorised translations than snipped ones. Differences may be due to editions of the works. For example, only the first edition of Bontekoe's book includes an engraving of a Dodo, later ones don't. In any case, "Poullets d'Inde" is "turkeys", see also:[67] FunkMonk (talk) 16:58, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
If quote boxes are going to be used on this page, then I think that old quotes should have the original source for validation. I am fairly sure that some Wikipedians specialise in translations, so it should be relatively easy to obtain a translation of the short section of the original French book. Snowman (talk) 17:11, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
Again, I'd rather use authoritative sources than homebrewed stuff. Verifiability, you know, it's a Wikipedia tenet. And again, there is no problem with that translation, turkeys are mentioned. It is your own oversight. FunkMonk (talk) 17:16, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
Surely, it will be easier to verify with the original book as one of the sources. Snowman (talk) 17:28, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
Then go ahead and add it as a citation next to the existing one. FunkMonk (talk) 17:32, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
Two on-line translators say "Poulets d'Inde" (with one "l") means "chickens of India" not turkeys. Walter Rothchild (W.R.) translated it as "Porphyrio", see a quote from the same book on the Réunion Night Heron article. Snowman (talk) 17:23, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
You won't get far with a direct Google translation, that should be pretty obvious. See: http://fr.wiktionary.org/wiki/poulet_d%E2%80%99Inde It basically means "fowl of India", as in West India. Thus turkeys. See also: http://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dinde "Ramené en Europe par les conquistadors espagnols en 1521, lors de la Conquête du Mexique, que l'on croyait être les Indes, ce volatile a pris le nom de « poule d'Inde », que l'usage a ramené à « dinde ». -- Curieusement, les Anglo-Saxons le désignent sous le nom de « poule de Turquie » ('Turkey Hen')." FunkMonk (talk) 17:32, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
I think that we need a French speaking Wikipedian to help out with translation, because two on-line translators say it mean chicken and Walter Rothchild says it means Porphyro (see above). I do not know much about French, so you are probably correct about the Turkey. I am puzzled by Rothchilds interpretation. Has the meaning of the word changed over the centuries? Snowman (talk) 17:46, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
So the article says it means "Turkey-chicks" and you say it means "Turkey" or "Turkey hen" above? See French dictionary, which I think says that "dinde" is an abbreviation for "poulet d’Inde". Where did the "-chick" part come from in the quote featured in the article? Snowman (talk) 18:06, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
"Poulet" can have various meanings, especially since it seems to be archaic. Even in English, "chicken" can even refer to an adult bird, as long as it is food. As for Rothschild, he wasn't exactly known for being cautious with his interpretations of old sources. FunkMonk (talk) 00:18, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
...but "-chick" in English does imply a young bird or a very young bird. Saying that a bird has legs like a turkey chick is not very descriptive without specifying the age of the chick. I think that the Frenchman was using everyday animal comparisons in his account that people would easily understand. Similarly many anatomy descriptions are based on everyday items; for example a "nutmeg liver". Snowman (talk) 12:42, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
In any case, the 1848 translation by Strickland omits "chick", so we could perhaps use his instead. FunkMonk (talk) 16:41, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Another difference is that the 1897 translation says "It is one of the best Game on the Island" at the end (the same as Google translator). I think that translation is a art and subjective, so I suggest providing more than one in-line citation for the sourcing of a translation. Snowman (talk) 17:32, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Well, if it pleases you, change it. Again, these things are nitpicks that go beyond FA criteria, but feel free to add what you like. I won't. FunkMonk (talk) 19:19, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Hume and Cheke 2004 call it a turkey in their paper when they refer to Dubois' work. See also note 2 in that paper where they attribute Oliver as the translator and point out another error in Oliver's translation, which appears in the article, helping to prove that the quote is actually from Oliver's work. To me it seems that the translation peculiarities indicate that sections of Oliver's 1897 work appears in long quotes in the article and these are not properly attributed. Attribution is a basic principal on the Wiki that a stub should be compliant with. Snowman (talk) 00:12, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 Possible omissions; old quotes are sourced from translations in books. Verification would be better if the original version of the quote is also provided as a source. I have recently added one old source for DuBois's description of the ibis, which was known as a solitaire at that time. Snowman (talk) 19:35, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Feel free to add what you find. But I won't be doing any searching for such, it isn't necessary, there's no urgent need for us to go past what recent published sources say. FunkMonk (talk) 00:18, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
I think that it would be best source the 1897 translation by Captain Pasfield, which is a little different to the version currently used that is copied from the modern journals and books. Using the 1897 translation, the work of translation can be attributed with certainty and the PD copyright can be assured. Snowman (talk) 16:24, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
I would like to know what the differences are first. This translation is from 1907. There's a different one from 1848. FunkMonk (talk) 16:35, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
If you have sourced 1907 translations, then that is fine. However, the article's documentation of the 1907 translation including attribution for the translator is incomplete or missing. Snowman (talk) 17:12, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
I'd say that's what citations are for. We don't attribute photos in captions either, unless such info is of interest to the reader. FunkMonk (talk) 17:34, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
...but the article does not give attribution (to the translators of quotes) in citations or anywhere else. The in-line citations would be a good place to put all the attributions for citations, so that they can be seen under a heading such as "Notes" or "References" towards the end of the article. Of course, images have their attributions on the image file. Snowman (talk) 18:52, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 "The Réunion Ibis lived alongside other recently extinct birds such as the ... [long list of animals]."; It also lived on the island with creatures that are still present. A broader range of animals would describe the fauna of its time better. It lived with a variety of lizards, geckos, and insects that are likely to be seen as food by ibis. Snowman (talk) 22:36, 28 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Feel free to add it if you can source it. FunkMonk (talk) 00:18, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Listing creatures that have also become extinct does not add much to ecology. Snowman (talk) 16:24, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
So what do you think of the "paleoecology" sections that are present in all dinosaur FAs? They were part of their ecological systems when they existed, so of course they matter. What's left of native wildlife there is so pathetic to not even being an ecosystem anymore. The main point of Cheke and Hume's work is to theoretically reconstruct the ancient ecosystem, by listing such extinct animals. FunkMonk (talk) 16:31, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
A creature that became extinct a few hundred years ago also lived with many creatures that are still living, so a list of extinct animals seems rather limited to me. It might be different creatures that became extinct millions of years ago. Snowman (talk) 16:41, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
I'm not sure what your last sentence means. All these animals are recently extinct. If Cheke and Hume find faunal lists of extinct animals useful for understanding the ancient ecosystem, I don't think there's much reason for us to doubt them, or that our doubt even merits action. FunkMonk (talk) 16:50, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 [edit] Review by Snowmanradio (2) 
 Some of the quotes in the article are copies of translations of old PD foreign language works. If the newer English versions are copyrighted, then complete paragraphs of the translation should not be copied to the Wiki. "This is true as well of the translations in the Penguin Classics series. Although faithful translations of public domain works, they each are protected by copyright."; see Wikipedia:FAQ/Copyright#Derivative works. It presume that it will be necessary to find out when the translations were published in order determine the copyright status of translated quotes in the article. Snowman (talk) 11:01, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 
There are only 19th century translations. Newer sources simply use those too. Republishing PD stuff doesn't renew its copyright. But even if we assume they were copyrighted, see the long copyrighted quote at: Thylacine FunkMonk (talk) 16:28, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
It seems that translating a PD work gives the newly created translated work a new copyright. I think that the copyright and attribution of all the quotations should be checked systematically in a similar way that the copyrights of images is checked. Snowman (talk) 16:49, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Again, irrelevant here, since all the translations are from 1907 and before. FunkMonk (talk) 16:52, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
You might be correct, but how does anyone know from the current documentation in the article. Snowman (talk) 16:55, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
I'll have a look. But again, how do you explain the quote in Thylacine? It seems to me that quotes come under fair use. They're not hosted on Commons, after all. FunkMonk (talk) 17:01, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
I have had a quick look at Thylacine and provisionally I would say the quote from R Dawkins is probably copyvio. Also, I think that it should have been excluded with Wikipedia:Do not include the full text of lengthy primary sources. I do not know if it is fair use or not, but the fair use rules on the en Wiki are strict and I will be surprised if it is fair use. It does not seem necessary or important for the article to me. Snowman (talk) 17:21, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Would be good to know what the actual guidelines say about copyrighted quotes. FunkMonk (talk) 17:38, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
The original quotes and translations (where necessary) of the quotes may all be in PD by luck rather than judgement, but I think that you will need to make this obvious in the documentation by finding out about the date of the translation. This is a consequence of copying long quotes into the Wiki article, which must not be a copy vio. Snowman (talk) 23:58, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
See: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Quotations#Copyrighted_material_and_fair_use So in theory, a few non-PD quotes could be used, as long they are attributed properly. Luckily, ours are PD. "Fair use does not need to be invoked for public domain works or text available under a CC-By-SA-compatible free license, so in such cases the extent of quotations is simply a matter of style." FunkMonk (talk) 00:05, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
There will not be a copyright problem if the works and translations are all early, as they seem to be. I have done a rather random check on some of the quotes, but I have not done a systematic check on all of the quotes. Snowman (talk) 00:18, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 Regarding the quotes, should the work of language translation be attributed? Snowman (talk) 15:26, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
 
You mean who translated it? That's what the citations are for. And in many cases it isn't even stated in the books. Since they're PD anyway, it doesn't really matter, but add if you find out. FunkMonk (talk) 16:29, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
As far as I am aware, on the Wiki it is much more preferable to attribute PD works, and I presume that this will include the work of translation of PD works. I have found out that Captain Samuel Pasfield Oliver translated Dubois and Leguat. Snowman (talk) 16:46, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Well, could give an interesting historical context, if anything. Again, add what you find. FunkMonk (talk) 16:50, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Giving the proper attributions for the work of translation would be fair. I do not see what this has got to do with historical context. My role here is as a reviewer. Snowman (talk) 17:00, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Well, since these things go beyond FAC criteria, if you want them added, you must do it yourself. I don't find it particularly important. I don't see any guidelines that say what you propose is necessary. FunkMonk (talk) 19:16, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Attribution is a basic principal here. Even Stub articles should have appropriate attribution. I see that you have used Rothchild (1907), as a source for some of the quotes in the article. Sometimes Rothchild says that his quotes are from Dubois (1674) and translated, but he does not say who the translator was, as far as I can see. Snowman (talk) 22:25, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Again, the quotes themselves have sources, and have been republished by practically all subsequent authors. You need to demonstrate that it is an FA criterion to show who translated a PD text in a published source over a century ago before I'll waste time tracking this down. Or you can do it yourself, if you find it so important. The point of attribution on Wikipedia is for verification, not credit. From this point, suggestions that are not related to actual FA criteria will be ignored, unless feasible. This FAC doesn't need to take a month. FunkMonk (talk) 22:54, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
It seems to me that the article had got blocks of texts in quotes from Oliver's 1897 translation. The quotes in the article have the same style, peculiarities, and errors as Oliver's work. I think that Dubois quotes in the article should attribute Oliver for the translation from French and source his book. See Wikipedia:Plagiarism#Public-domain_sources, which says "Whether copyright-expired or in the public domain for other reasons, material from public-domain sources is welcome on Wikipedia, but such material must be properly attributed.". This is important. Snowman (talk) 23:53, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Those who wrote that obviously meant material as in original text written by someone, not that we should go and hunt down extremely obscure info on who translated what back in the 19th century. But as I said, please add such info if you find it. FunkMonk (talk) 23:56, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
As I stated earlier, it looks to me that Oliver's work of translation is not attributed nor sourced directly from his book in English of Dubois' French book. Snowman (talk) 00:01, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
And as I stated earlier, feel free to add it. No one is holding you back. FunkMonk (talk) 00:10, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
My role with this is as a reviewer. Snowman (talk) 00:13, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
Your role is to give advise that is relevant to the FAC criteria. I'm sorry to say that it doesn't concern this FAC that you just discovered that Walter Rothschild quoted a translation from someone else over a hundred years ago, a fact which has not been mentioned in any of the relevant literature since. It is a mere curiosity that you can add if it so pleases you. It'll take as long as it does for you to reply to this comment. FunkMonk (talk) 00:19, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
Attribution is important on the Wiki. It would be quite easy to attribute Dobois' translated work to Oliver. This is the Dubois' 1674 book, and this is Oliver's 1897 book, and both should open on the section of the books about birds. However, I have not looked into the translations of the other quotes, and you seem to be more familiar with those than me. Snowman (talk) 00:36, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
You personally discovered Rothschild quoted Oliver. It is your own pet peeve, not mine. I couldn't care less, and the quotes are already PD and cited to a prominent source, however you turn it. So do it yourself, or forget it. I've done my part. And I repeat: The point of attribution on Wikipedia is for verification, not credit. The article cites a source which includes this text, but it doesn't matter where it appeared first. It is already verifiable, Understand? FunkMonk (talk) 00:46, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
I think that your comment could have been phrased differently. Anybody can see the long translated quotes in the article that are based on Dubois 1674 French book alongside Oliver's 1897 English translation and see similarities. I note that Rothchild's book was published in 1907. The issue is about attribution (including attribution for translated works), not verification. Snowman (talk) 01:17, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
Again, it would had taken you less time to add the citations than writing the above comments. And no, I'm still not convinced it is an FA criterion to clarify whoever published translations of a couple of PD sentences first. But well, if a second opinion could be provided, who knows? FunkMonk (talk) 01:49, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
I have attributed one of the quotations by Dubois and translated by Oliver. I provided the sources above, so anyone could have done it quite quickly. Snowman (talk) 11:52, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
Cool! And on that note, nice you found that Dubois had an article. I've been looking for that. FunkMonk (talk) 20:28, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 Possible omission: Debois mentions feral goats on Reunion a lot. He also mentions pigs with horns (?hogs). Snowman (talk) 22:00, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Pigs are mentioned under extinction. As for goats, I'm not sure how they would affect this bird. Many animals were introduced at the time, but their impact was not the same, of course. FunkMonk (talk) 22:45, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
The goat Wiki article says that goats remove native scrub, trees, and other vegetation. This probably is not as harmful as pigs, if pigs sniff out and eat eggs in ground nests. Snowman (talk) 23:21, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
Yeah. In any case, no sources mention interaction between goats and the solitaire. FunkMonk (talk) 23:32, 30 January 2013 (UTC)
 "fat-cycles": jargon. Is this hyphenated expression used anywhere else? Why not substitute with "weight fluctuations". Snowman (talk) 11:30, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
 
Because it is seasonal and systematic, not random. FunkMonk (talk) 12:52, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
I presume you imply; "seasonal weight fluctuations". Snowman (talk) 13:17, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
I'm not sure if either is less jargony than the other. Is what you propose more frequently used in the literature? If not, I'd prefer to use what the relevant sources say. FunkMonk (talk) 13:30, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
The article currently has the jargon and then the explanation of the jargon, which seems to have an element of repetition. Snowman (talk) 15:55, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
On what page do Cheke and Hume point this out? And how is explanation repetition? FunkMonk (talk) 15:57, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
I have thought about many of your replies, and to me it seems that you sometimes have some sort of tunnel vision that makes is difficult for you to see reviewers point of view or you are reluctant to investigate issues raised by reviewers. I provide this feedback with the hope that it will help you to have a little more insight into your stance, which you might like to think about. Your comment above seems to be a reply to this thread and the thread below, so to me it seems that you have made this page slightly more complicated and difficult to follow by commenting on two topics of discussion in one reply. Snowman (talk) 19:14, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
 I can not translate Dubois's original books from French to English; however, Check &amp; Hume point out that there are errors in the translation of Dubois's book by Caption Oliver. I think that a more accurate translation of Dubois's quote is; "These birds are so-called solitaires because they are always found alone. They are as big as a goose and their plumage is white, with black tips to the wings and the tail. The tail has some feathers resembling an ostrich. They have a long neck and a beak shaped like the wood-cocks but larger. Their legs and feet are like those of the turkey. This bird is caught by running after it, as it flies very little. It is the best game of the island." See Check &amp; Hume and Dodo-solitaire. I think that the errors in Oliver's translation should not be transcribed into the quotes in the Wiki article. The changes would relate to its flight and the description of its legs with a likeness to a Turkey or Turkey-chick so I think that these are rather important. Snowman (talk) 15:55, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
 
It is explained on page 71 of Cheke and Hume 2004. It is very easy to find by searching for Turkey. It might not be the first time Turkey features on the page, but it is easy to find even without being spoon fed the page number. Snowman (talk) 19:14, 12 February 2013 (UTC)
 Provisional impression. I think that this article has some interesting and well presented parts. It also has some parts that are complicated, which I struggle to follow, partly because there are so many facets, names, and drawings in the history of its taxonomy. I am finding this article difficult to evaluate. For me, slightly different versions of text translated from foreign language sources tend to add the the difficulty in evaluating this article. I wonder if anything can be done to make the article easier to read, perhaps by copy-editing the language, re-organising subsections, or adding extra subheadings. If all the images are kept in the article, I wonder if double images would help organise the two ibis photographs and also the two similar Dodo paintings. Is my provisional impression flawed, because of my limitations and idiosyncrasies, or do others share any aspects of my point of view? Snowman (talk) 11:05, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
 
The thing is, the taxonomic history of the bird is complicated and hard to follow, there's not much we can do about that. As the 2006 book you linked to demonstrates, even modern, professional writers get it utterly wrong. If most details are to be presented and not just glossed over, it inevitably gets convoluted and complex. And even then, there are many details I've left out, to make it even more user friendly. As for old quotes, when the majority of sources use the ones we have here, I think it would be inappropriate to tamper wit them. But if you find more readable, PD translations, sure, be my quest and replace them. And personally, I don't like "double images". The article has plenty of room, no need to stack the images so close to each other. FunkMonk (talk) 17:25, 1 February 2013 (UTC)
 [edit] Review by Casliber 
 Right, I will read through now and jot queries below: Casliber (talk · contribs) 13:06, 2 February 2013 (UTC) 
 
I think it might be simpler and less misleading to remove "of the Réunion Solitaire" from the caption of the taxobox illustration (?)
Hi, I explained this to Snowman above, not sure if you saw it, or what you think about the explanation. Schlegel did now know of an ibis, he classified the bird as a species of Dodo in the same article the sketch is from, so retroactively labellingit as the ibis would be kind of misleading, wouldn't it? But I've circumvented the problem by saying "the bird" instead of either. FunkMonk (talk) 05:16, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
The idea that the solitaire and the subfossil ibis are identical has only met limited dissent - "met with limited dissent"
Fixed. FunkMonk (talk) 05:16, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
I think I agree that "seasonal fat-cycles" needs some extra linking, explaining or something in the lead. I will think about this one and see what I can come up with.
I have not found any usable articles, so I'm not sure what I should link to. Any ideas? FunkMonk (talk) 05:16, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
I wonder whether the royal menagerie is the one listed at Subsidiary structures of the Palace of Versailles and hence deserviing of a link to the appropriate section.
Possibly, I'll link it. FunkMonk (talk) 05:16, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
Contemporary accounts described the "Solitaire" as having white and grey plumage merging into yellow, black wing tips and tail feathers - I think I'd say "Reunion Ibis" here, or just "the species".
Alright, I think "species" would be the least misleading. FunkMonk (talk) 05:16, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
I am musing on this, but I think it might go better if we used its current name in all but a historical bit - e.g. I'd use the current name in Behaviour and ecology and elsewhere, and only use "Solitaire" when explaining why that term was used.
The problem is, that most of the behaviour and description section also refers to the historical accounts. But "this species" and "this bird" may be a good alternative. I'll add that. FunkMonk (talk) 05:16, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
  Overall, looks alright otherwise, but the name issue can be done a bit clearer I think. Casliber (talk · contribs) 06:35, 3 February 2013 (UTC) I think I am happy now with how the name(s) are used in the article. Casliber (talk · contribs) 12:55, 4 February 2013 (UTC) 
 
One final quibble - in the last para, you have two statements on when the species vanished - in the first and last sentences. It would be good to somehow amalgamate them as it reads a bit funnily otherwise. Casliber (talk · contribs) 12:57, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
Rephrased. FunkMonk (talk) 22:02, 4 February 2013 (UTC)
Not quite what I had in mind but I agree it does read better, so ok. Casliber (talk · contribs) 01:42, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
  So to summarise, I cautiously support on comprehensiveness and prose at this point. I am not seeing any deal-breakers in prose left, I think the use of direct quotes in quote boxes makes the subject alot more engaging to the general reader and I strongly suspect the sources have been investigated thoroughly. I feel the use of "solitaire" has been confined to the area of hte text it is germane to and hopefully is less confusing for the general reader. As a minor formatting issue, it is good to align all refs - so all reference titles should either be in Title Case or sentence case (just choose one and align - given there are German ones Title Case might be better...) Casliber (talk · contribs) 02:00, 5 February 2013 (UTC) 
 
Thanks, as for case, I was under the impression that books were title case, and scientific articles were not? FunkMonk (talk) 03:01, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
The feedback I've got from Sasata previously is that they should all be the same...so I have generally aligned them as title case. Casliber (talk · contribs) 03:35, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
Sasata does it as FunkMonk suggests- see his latest FA. J Milburn (talk) 08:53, 5 February 2013 (UTC)
What's important is that they are consistent, not necessarily the same. Like J Milburn points out, I use title case for books and sentence case for articles (but title case for the name of the journal, and sentence case for chapters in books) because that seems logical to me. There shouldn't be any problem with someone using title case for both books and journal article titles either. Sasata (talk) 02:05, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
Aha. Does what I've used here seem sensible to you? FunkMonk (talk) 02:14, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
Yes, it's largely sensible. If I were nitpicking the formatting, I might suggest the following trivialities...
the "a" after the colon in ref#4 should be capitalized
the "official title" (i.e. the Worldcat entry obtained from clicking the isbn) of ref#7 doesn't include ": A synopsis on the fossil Rallidae" and could be left out without hindering anyone's ability to find this source
ref#9 is available online here, so one might include a courtesy link; also, if this proceedings publication has an editor(s), their names are typically included in the citation
if the translated title is included in ref#14, for consistency it should be included with the other foreign language titles as well
I think the "To" in the title of ref#16 should be lower case (there's no set rule about this; see the options at Title_case#Headings_and_publication_titles and be consistent throughout)
… but I'm not, so feel free to ignore :-) Sasata (talk) 02:36, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
Heheh, cool, I'll work on it anyway. As for the "fossil Rallidae" title, that's the name of the relevant chapter within the book, but maybe the page numbers are enough? FunkMonk (talk) 02:44, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
Ah, in that case give the chapter title in the "chapter=" parameter of cite book. Sasata (talk) 03:10, 6 February 2013 (UTC)
I've implemented the above suggestions, apart form the link, which I couldn't get to work for some reason... FunkMonk (talk) 08:32, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
I've reformatted the reference a smidge and added a link to where the PDF can be downloaded, which will be useful for anyone chasing up the reference- linking straight to the (very large) PDF is not ideal. J Milburn (talk) 16:45, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
Thumbs up! FunkMonk (talk) 04:30, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): Cyclonebiskit (talk) 23:29, 10 January 2013 (UTC)
  Hurricane Debbie in 1961 was one of the most powerful storms to impact Ireland on record. It brought destructive winds in excess of 100 mph to western parts of the country, damaging or destroying many homes and leaving thousands without power. Across the British Isles, 18 people lost their lives and damage exceeded US$50 million. I believe this article qualifies for featured candidate as I have exhausted both free and paid services to obtain the most comprehensive account of this particular hurricane. I hope you all enjoy reading this article as much as I enjoyed writing it! Cheers, Cyclonebiskit (talk) 23:29, 10 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Support, with the caveat that I reviewed it for GA. That being said, here are some last comments. 
 "during September" - in the opening sentence, should that be changed to "in September"?
"however, operationally," - remove one of these adverbs.
"Once clear of the islands, data on the storm became sparse and it is uncertain what took place with the storm over the following several days as it tracked west-northwestward and later northward." - a comma would be lovely somewhere in here, and maybe change one of the "storm" to "Debbie"
"Maintaining this intensity for over a day" - I think "this" should be something like "its peak", or something, given it's the start of a new paragraph.
Probably self-explanatory, but I think you should clarify somewhere, perhaps as a note, that all damage totals are in that 1961's currency.
"only a handful of which were serious" - handful? :/
I think the specifics on the fatalities should be in the same paragraph where you mention the death total.
"30,000 trees were felled" - that verb phrasing seems weird to me, but IDK.
I dont like the word felled myself as it just feels weird so i changed it to were cut down though i wonder if knocked down would be better.Jason Rees (talk) 18:50, 13 January 2013 (UTC)
UK paragraph is pretty long. Perhaps split into two?
  That's it. Overall, looks pretty good. --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 18:45, 12 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Made all the corrections. Thanks for the review Hink! Cyclonebiskit (talk) 00:55, 14 January 2013 (UTC)
 Inappropriate variety of English Ireland and the UK both use BE, using AE for the article is not appropriate. Jimfbleak - talk to me? 19:32, 12 January 2013 (UTC)
Ive tried to get it into BE, but am loathed to do too much.Jason Rees (talk) 18:50, 13 January 2013 (UTC)
Drive-by 2 Belmullet and Norway are overlinked. Your use of "corn" without a link gives the misleading impression (especially as it's in AE) that it refers to corn Jimfbleak - talk to me? 19:44, 12 January 2013 (UTC)
 
Any comments by the nominator on these? Jimfbleak - talk to me? 07:01, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
Sorry for not getting to this earlier. I linked corn to maize since that's the intended link and delinked a few instances of Belmullet and Norway. Cyclonebiskit (talk) 21:13, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
Fine, I'm aware that in Ireland "corn" often refers to the oats, and I don't have access to the source, so I just wanted to be sure that there wasn't a misunderstanding here Jimfbleak - talk to me? 07:19, 18 January 2013 (UTC)
  Source review - spotchecks not done 
 FN10: is that the correct spelling of the publication?
FN14: no title?
FN24: missing italics. Nikkimaria (talk) 02:57, 13 January 2013 (UTC)
  Comments 
 HURDAT is not good enough to prove that Debby made landfall in Ireland, since the NOAA report says that Debby skirted around the west coast of Ireland. I also note that the supposed point of landfall is less than 2 km away from the sea, which would suggest to me that it didnt make landfall and just passed near the island.Jason Rees (talk) 18:21, 13 January 2013 (UTC)
Removed mention of the landfall. After looking at it again, that fact plus the Met Eireann supports the center remaining just offshore. Cyclonebiskit (talk) 16:19, 14 January 2013 (UTC)
  Support – I don't like supporting articles without bringing up a few comments, but I can't find anything worth mentioning. Nice work. :\ TropicalAnalystwx13 (talk) 00:33, 16 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Support – Nice job on totally revamping an article that was originally an idea of mine.--12george1 (talk) 20:58, 16 January 2013 (UTC) 
 [edit] Review by SandyGeorgia 
 Oppose. Am I correct in assuming that the previous three supports are from hurricane editors? Independent review is needed. 
 Hurricane Debbie was one of the most powerful cyclones to strike Ireland in September on record.
Opening sentence, I'm left wondering why the most powerful "in September" ... what is special about September?
Shouldn't "on record" be after "most powerful cyclones"? Unsure ...
Changed order, but I think the fact that it's the strongest storm to hit a country in a particular month is pretty notable. I'm sure we'd have the same if we had a record storm in April in the US. --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 00:20, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
OK, but it reads ... funny. SandyGeorgia (Talk) 07:02, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
Tracking generally westward, the system eventually moved off the coast of Senegal on September 5 ...
What does "eventually" add here? Redundant?
This was done. --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 00:20, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
See here and here for discussions of the overuse of however; not all of them used here seem necessary.
It's used once now in the whole article. --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 00:20, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Unsettled weather associated with the storm resulted in a plane crash that killed 60 people in the islands during this time.
What does "during this time" add? Please screen for redundant prose.
CB removed it. --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 00:20, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Once clear of the islands, data on the storm became sparse, and it is uncertain what took place with Debbie over the following several days as it tracked west-northwestward and later northward.
Once clear of the islands, the storm tracked west-northwestward and later northward, but other data for several days is sparse ??? "With Debbie" seems repetitive, perhaps a different construction like this can be used to solve that.
Changed. --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 00:20, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Regardless of which took place, the system deepened as it neared the British Isles, ...
What does "regardless of which took place" add? Redundant.
To highlight the uncertainty whether it was tropical or not. I personally feel it adds value. --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 00:20, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Throughout the country, 12 people lost their lives in relation to Debbie and damage was estimated at US$40–50 million.
What does "Throughout the country" add? "To Debbie"? Damage was estimated at US$40–50 million and 12 people died.
To emphasize Ireland the country, not just the island. I changed the other bit. --♫ Hurricanehink (talk) 00:20, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
  That is only the lead; prose review is needed ... mostly for redundancy. SandyGeorgia (Talk) 22:44, 17 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Five days, no response from nominator-- unwatching. SandyGeorgia (Talk) 20:56, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
To be fair to the nominator, he and others appear to have dealt with some of your issues but i think he is currently busy in real life dealing with his university stuff. I will double check your comments against the article later.Jason Rees (talk) 23:38, 22 January 2013 (UTC)
I've gone through the article a few times and made some changes, namely condensing and removing redundancies. Please let me know if there are still issues with the article. Cyclonebiskit (talk) 16:26, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
Just noting here that I have contacted Sandy on her talk page to make sure that it's known I've addressed the issues despite the page unwatch. Cyclonebiskit (talk) 17:04, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
Thanks! I've struck my oppose because I don't have time for further review, but did see that extevensive prose changes have been made. SandyGeorgia (Talk) 07:02, 29 January 2013 (UTC)
  Image check - all OK (PD NOAA, own work, NASA). Sources and authors provided. GermanJoe (talk) 09:54, 28 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Quick Comment – Just wondering, any reason why you have travelled instead of traveled, as it appears other words like 'center' are written in American-spelling. TheAustinMan(Talk·Works) 00:39, 8 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Changed all instances of 'center' to 'centre' (except for proper names) Cyclonebiskit (talk) 19:44, 9 February 2013 (UTC)
 Support. - From a non-hurricane editor. Nice work! GabeMc (talk|contribs) 01:29, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 
 Nominator(s): GregJackP Boomer! 20:17, 6 January 2013 (UTC)
  I am nominating this for featured article because I believe that it meets all the FA criteria and is an important case in Native American case law at the U.S. Supreme Court. It has been a GA for about 2 years, but has recently been expanded significantly and just had a GOCE check. GregJackP Boomer! 20:17, 6 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Comment. The lead should be expanded to cover the post-decision analysis and any other subsequent developments. Additionally, I think it'd be useful to have a section covering the history of Tribal-Federal relations since there seems to be a lot of precedent that pops up in the "Supreme Court" section without any prior discussion. This structure makes it a bit difficult to follow for someone unfamiliar with this area of the law. -- Lord Roem ~ (talk) 04:43, 7 January 2013 (UTC)
 
I will expand the lead and work on the requested section (lol, though this area of the law is difficult to follow for those who are familar with it, the Court has multiple personalities as far as Indian rights are concerned). It may take a bit, I'm busy IRL. GregJackP Boomer! 05:06, 7 January 2013 (UTC)
I've done part of the expansion of the lead (still have more to do). As far as the federal-tribal relations, what do you think about my adding a small subsection to subsequent developments, with a {{main}} template to the tribal sovereignty article? GregJackP Boomer! 01:39, 8 January 2013 (UTC)
I need to clarify my point; I'm referring to federal-tribal relations in terms of the development of law since the 19th century. It seems that the only case discussed before you get to the issue around Lara is Duro. I think you need a subsection under "Background" that covers the changes in this area of the law over time. For example, when the dissent section says "... which referenced prior cases dealing with sovereignty and jurisdiction, from the decision made in United States v. Kagama,[100] to the opinion made in South Dakota v. Bourland", I should have already read some background on what the issues in those cases were. I'm aware this is complex (you have my admiration for attempting this challenge!) but such a section would greatly increase the clarity and readability of this article. All the best, Lord Roem ~ (talk) 02:18, 8 January 2013 (UTC)
OK, I can do that. GregJackP Boomer! 12:16, 8 January 2013 (UTC)
I've added a section on criminal jurisdiction to the background (Major Crimes Act). Hopefully this will work. It doesn't address Bourland, but I can't figure out where Souter was going with that - Bourland was a case involving hunting and fishing rights. GregJackP Boomer! 13:32, 8 January 2013 (UTC)
  ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘ Support. My concerns have been resolved; prose looks good and isn't too complicated to follow for someone (like me) who knows nothing about this area of the law. -- Lord Roem ~ (talk) 20:24, 28 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Support.
I am used to articles telling me what the vote was, who was in the minority etc. The Decision section does not say this (nor that Scalia joined Souter in dissent). I know, it is in the infobox, but it is not sourced there. Could this be added?
 
Done. Added to Dissent subsection, first sentence. Vote count added below.
 
Last sentence of Opinion of the Court is unsourced. I would also prefer that it say that The decision of the Eighth Circuit Court was reversed
 
Done. Sourced to the Oyez Project, changed to "Eighth Circuit", added the vote count (7-2).
 
Why is it the Eight circuit court in the article and the 8th in the infobox?
 
Comment - WP:MOSLAW requires following Bluebook citation style for cases. In the infobox, it is part of a case citation, hence "8th Cir." In text, it should be spelled out, as part of the proper name of the court ("United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit"), shortened in text to "Eighth Circuit."
 
What is the source for the case being cited over 190 times?
 
Not done (yet) - I'm looking for it and if I can't find it, I'll remove it.
  Hawkeye7 (talk) 04:45, 13 January 2013 (UTC) 
 
I will get on these and see if we can take care of everything. GregJackP Boomer! 05:50, 13 January 2013 (UTC)
 Note, while this candidacy seems to have been going reasonably well, I just wanted to note that the nominator seems to have retired as of yesterday. ceranthor 21:44, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
I will make any required changes. Hawkeye7 (talk) 22:34, 7 February 2013 (UTC)
 
Thanks Hawkeye, a friend told me about the comments here, and I returned to fix what I could, but I don't know if I'll be back again. I don't think of this as coming back from retirement, just as closing out unfinished business, but I appreciate you help. GregJackP Boomer! 05:06, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 Quick Comments from Ceranthor
 No dab links. External links check out.
Formatting of reference 9 is broken.
 
Formatting had been fixed until FiachraByrne reverted my corrections. I've fixed it again, and removed (again) the information I couldn't find a cite for. GregJackP Boomer! 05:06, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 Footnote 3 refers to $, must be USD but not specified.
 
Y'all need to make up your mind. Do you want USD in articles or not? I get tired of taking it out, putting it in, taking it out, etc. Let me know. GregJackP Boomer! 05:06, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
That's okay then. ceranthor 00:49, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
 No need to link states in Footnote 14 or 15.
 
It's a template. Plus, it is not linking the states, it is a link to the statute (U.S.C. stands for United States Code). GregJackP Boomer! 05:06, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
My bad. ceranthor 00:49, 11 February 2013 (UTC)
 Is source 124 a publication like a book? A page number, if available, is desirable.
 
The page number is present, page 90. The reference states: David Wilkins, Justice Thomas and Federal Indian Law – Hitting His Stride, America is Indian Country: Opinions and Perspectives from Indian Country Today 90 (Jose Barreiro &amp; Tim Johnson eds. 2004). Formatting for Bluebook is: Article author in roman type, article name in italics, volume number if needed, book or work title in small caps, page number, parenthetical editor(s) and date of publication.
 While I'm fairly certain abbreviation is okay in references, omitting proper names is not. Source 125's reference to The New York Times must include the proper "The" in front of "NY Times". The publisher (Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, Jr.) should also be mentioned for that source.
 
Not if you are citing per Bluebook rules. Certain abbreviations are mandated by the citation style. See Table 13, page 458, Bluebook, 19th edition, The New York Times is always abbreviated as "N.Y. Times" (note that there is no space between N. &amp; Y. - that is intentional also, per Rule 6.1(a)). See also page 444, stating to "Omit the words 'a,' 'at,' 'in,' 'of,' and 'the'...." Publisher's names are always omitted when citing per Bluebook. Bluebook is an acceptable citation style per WP:CITE#Citation style, and if you use the citation style you should follow its rules. For newspapers, it is Rule 16.6, pp. 151-52. The New York Times is shown as an example numerous times in the Bluebook, and it is always cited as I have noted above. GregJackP Boomer! 05:06, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 
Done. GregJackP Boomer! 05:06, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
  I'll probably come back to look at the prose, since this is in desperate need of reviews. ceranthor 15:33, 9 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Image check - all OK (PD-USGov, PD-US, PD-1923). Sources and authors provided. GermanJoe (talk) 08:14, 11 February 2013 (UTC) 
 Nominator(s): User:PRODUCER and User:Peacemaker67 Peacemaker67 (send... over) 06:27, 30 December 2012 (UTC)
  We are nominating this for featured article because it has undergone significant refinement in the last few months, including a GAN review and MILHIST ACR, and we believe it now meets the FA criteria. Regards, Peacemaker67 (send... over) 06:27, 30 December 2012 (UTC) 
 Sources and images but no spotchecks 
 Captions that aren't complete sentences shouldn't end in periods
 
Does this apply to both the map and the pic? I modified one, but they seem like sentences to me... Peacemaker67 (send... over) 04:53, 31 December 2012 (UTC)
 Not sure you can justify a non-free image of the subject where he appears in a free image later in the article. That being said, would File:Jevđević_with_Italians.jpg still be free if initial publication were in Croatia? Since publication location is uncertain, should account for both possibilities
 
We were working on the basis that the closer, almost face-on image in the infobox is justified in that the other image (being a profile shot from further away) doesn't really show his appearance properly for the purpose of identification. Peacemaker67 (send... over) 04:53, 31 December 2012 (UTC)
 
 No citations to Goldstein 29 October 2012.
 
  Nikkimaria (talk) 16:20, 30 December 2012 (UTC) 
 Support on prose per standard disclaimer. I've looked at the changes made since I reviewed this for A-class, and I'm making some minor tweaks now. These are my edits. - Dank (push to talk) 04:03, 2 January 2013 (UTC) 
 Thanks for the review Dank! Peacemaker67 (send... over) 12:13, 2 January 2013 (UTC)
  Comment Images - both images are most likely PD (either PD-croatia or PD-because as a work in a non-signatory state of the Berne Convention), but the situation with a now defunct state is often vague and confusing. I can file a request for advice on Commons to be sure, if you want. GermanJoe (talk) 14:52, 4 January 2013 (UTC) 
 That would be a great help. Thanks, Peacemaker67 (send... over) 15:11, 4 January 2013 (UTC)
Added that question to WP:Media copyright questions (PD-status of ...?) for Wiki-files. If you have any additional info, please provide it there. GermanJoe (talk) 18:34, 4 January 2013 (UTC)
  Image check - OK (see comments), two requests for feedback on Wiki and Commons didn't gain any additional advice. 
 Based on available information both files should be ok (added PD-croatia as suggested for the second possible country of publication).
WP:NFCC allows fair-use, when no other image for the "same encyclopedic purpose" is available. The second image is of very low quality and the subject is barely recognizable, so both images are used for different purposes within the article.
Unlikely, but if any other images can be found later, the actual photos should be exchanged. GermanJoe (talk) 09:32, 18 January 2013 (UTC)
  Comments 
Moved to WT:V#phrasing of the non-English sources rules
The following discussion has been closed. Please do not modify it.
The references to Goldstein and Dizdar are non-English so they need to be made to comply with WP:NONENG - please cite the relevant portion of the text in each case. Is Prometej.ba a reliable source? --Joy [shallot] (talk) 13:23, 17 January 2013 (UTC)
Not sure what aspect of WP:NONENG you are referring to. Those non-English sources are being cited for information, are you questioning whether those sources actually support the information in the article? If so, which citation(s) and on what basis? Thanks, Peacemaker67 (send... over) 10:12, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Er, please re-read WP:NONENG. I see nothing really ambiguous in the text of that policy section. You are citing a non-English source for information, and you don't have to provide a translation, but you still have to provide the original text. --Joy [shallot] (talk) 17:54, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
I don't see the policy requiring me to do so as Peacemaker pointed out. If there is a statement you believe isn't supported by the source please specify which. The piece written by Goldstein and published by Prometej is profusely referenced itself and written by a reliable author. It was published after a presentation (which Goldstein spoke at) was held in Prozor-Rama. [68] I see no issues with the source given the circumstances. --◅ PRODUCER (TALK) 17:08, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
What part of the linked policy makes you think that there is no requirement to do what I wrote? --Joy [shallot] (talk) 17:54, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
I'm confused. I only checked Dizadar ... this article doesn't seem to be quoting a foreign source (for which NONENG would require a quote in the original language), only paraphrasing it. - Dank (push to talk) 18:44, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
Er, did you see the bolded text "When citing a non-English source for information"? The verb "citing" doesn't imply "quoting". --Joy [shallot] (talk) 19:40, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
Yes, I saw that. What I haven't seen is which information you're challenging, or why. Any good-faith challenge is fine ... if you have reason to believe that something is wrong, you should absolutely say so. But what's not fair is "Policy says you have to provide it if I challenge it, so I'll just go ahead and challenge everything, just in case, without giving a reason". The same issue comes up in WP:BURDEN ... information has to be provided if someone challenges it, but that doesn't mean that I have to jump if someone says "I'm challenging everything" without giving a reason. - Dank (push to talk) 20:05, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
I would never do that. The issue is that the NONENG policy section makes for a different situation - it sets a higher threshold of verifiability on information referenced to foreign sources. The threshold is such that it requires a quote in the foreign language, and sometimes more (a translation). This policy section wasn't in place back when I first arrived, and it isn't uniformly respected across the project, but it makes sense - the standard of verifiability on English-language works is that you have to have enough information to find them and check them, while the standard of verifiability on foreign-language works is that you have to have more than that because it's that much easier to have a source misinterpreted when it's not written in the native language. So, to guard against that, we quote the relevant part of the source. It certainly sounds like something that should be done in a featured article. --Joy [shallot] (talk) 20:27, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
I'm still not sure what part of the policy requires this (sans challenge). It says, "When citing a non-English source for information, it is not always necessary to provide a translation. However, if a question should arise as to whether the non-English original actually supports the information, relevant portions of the original and a translation should be given in a footnote, as a courtesy." If you are questioning a particular bit of information, please state what it is. If not, with greatest respect I don't think your comment is in accordance with the policy. In any case, I understand you have the requisite language skills, so you know if it is consistent or not. Peacemaker67 (send... over) 21:48, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
You read the second bullet point, but ignored the first one. It requires both the original text and the translation for quotations. The second one, about citations, may seem to be distinct, but it isn't - yes, its phrasing leaves out an explicit mention of providing the original text, but it then implies that it would have been logical to think that it's necessary to provide a translation. The intent seems clear to me - doing both is considered the best. So, a featured article doing neither - doesn't sound right. But, I'll go search the talk page archives there to see if this question came up before. --Joy [shallot] (talk) 22:48, 25 January 2013 (UTC)
 Comments – 
 "Case White in the winter of 1942/43." According to the Manual of Style, the slash should be an en dash instead.
I'd prefer "winter of 1943", if that's okay. MOSNUM says: "2005–06 (unspaced) generally denotes a two-year range; 2005/06 may be used to signify a period of 12 or fewer months, such as a corporate or governmental fiscal year, if that is the convention used in reliable sources; sports seasons spanning two calendar years should be uniformly written as 2005–06 season." - Dank (push to talk) 02:35, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
I've gone with Dank's version.
Operation Alta: "and urged him to undertake this operation as soon as possible in order to clear the Partisans...". The "in order" is a bit of wordiness that can safely be removed without affecting the meaning.
"participated in the Italian-led Operation Alta. Operation Alta...". Try to avoid repetition from the end of one sentence to the start of another, like in this example.
"with Germans and NDH troops driving from the north and Italian and Chetnik forces pushing from the Neretva River." This is a type of "with + -ing" structure that is typically awkward. To fix it, you could try a semi-colon before this, followed by "Germans and NDH troops drove from the north and Italian and Chetnik forces pushed from the Neretva River."
"while others were sent later to northern Dalmatia to aid Momcilo Dujic's forces." Flip "sent" and "later" in order for the best possible sentence flow.
Case White: "and also recognition of almost all of eastern Herzegovina as a 'Chetnik zone'." No need to even have "also" here.
How were the people who went to Mostar to kill him stoppped? An assassination attempt seems to be an important enough event to justify an extra sentence or two of explanation.
Withdrawal: "after which he was captured and killed." Who is "he"? Durisic? Giants2008 (Talk) 02:27, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
All addressed, except that there is no more information available on the attempted assassination. Thanks for the review! Peacemaker67 (send... over) 07:47, 23 January 2013 (UTC)
Support – Hard for me to know much about whether this is comprehensive, but it seems so at first glance to this reviewer who knows nothing on the topic; I wish there was more on the assassination, but can't penalize the article when the sources don't provide anything. I'm satisfied with the writing after the tweaks, and am not concerned about whether or not a translation is provided for the Serbo-Croatian sources. Giants2008 (Talk) 01:14, 27 January 2013 (UTC)
Support. - Nice work! GabeMc (talk|contribs) 01:28, 10 February 2013 (UTC)
 
  