  
 A featured article exemplifies our very best work and is distinguished by professional standards of writing, presentation, and sourcing. In addition to meeting the policies regarding content for all Wikipedia articles, it has the following attributes. 
 It is—
well-written: its prose is engaging, even brilliant, and of a professional standard;
comprehensive: it neglects no major facts or details and places the subject in context;
well-researched: it is a thorough and representative survey of the relevant literature. Claims are verifiable against high-quality reliable sources and are supported by inline citations where appropriate;
neutral: it presents views fairly and without bias; and
stable: it is not subject to ongoing edit wars and its content does not change significantly from day to day, except in response to the featured article process.
It follows the style guidelines, including the provision of—
a lead: a concise lead section that summarizes the topic and prepares the reader for the detail in the subsequent sections;
appropriate structure: a system of hierarchical section headings and a substantial but not overwhelming table of contents; and
consistent citations: where required by criterion 1c, consistently formatted inline citations using either footnotes (&lt;ref&gt;Smith 2007, p. 1.&lt;/ref&gt;) or Harvard referencing (Smith 2007, p. 1)—see citing sources for suggestions on formatting references; for articles with footnotes, the meta:cite format is recommended. The use of citation templates is not required.
Media. It has images and other media, where appropriate, with succinct captions, and acceptable copyright status. Images included follow the image use policy. Non-free images or media must satisfy the criteria for inclusion of non-free content and be labeled accordingly.
Length. It stays focused on the main topic without going into unnecessary detail and uses summary style.
 
 [edit] See also 
 [edit] Advice from Wikipedians 
 [edit] Notes and references 
 Smith, Jane (2007). The Book of Examples. New York: Best Publishers, Inc.
   