  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Main Page 
 
 
  
 
  From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
From today's featured article
Liverpool Football Club's participation in European competitions organised by Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) began in 1964. Since then, Liverpool have won eleven European trophies, making them Britain's most successful team in UEFA competitions. They have won the UEFA Champions League (formerly known as the European Cup) five times, the UEFA Europa League (formerly known as the UEFA Cup) three times, and the UEFA Super Cup three times. Liverpool qualified for European competitions for 21 consecutive seasons until the 1985 European Cup Final, the occasion of the Heysel Stadium disaster, following which the club was banned from Europe for six seasons. Since being readmitted, they have qualified for the Champions League eight times and the UEFA Cup seven times. As a result of their victory in the 2005 UEFA Champions League Final, Liverpool won the European Champion Clubs' Cup trophy (pictured) outright. Bob Paisley is the club's most successful manager in Europe, with five trophies. Liverpool's biggest win in Europe is an 11–0 victory over Strømsgodset in the 1974–75 European Cup Winners' Cup. In European competitions, Jamie Carragher holds the club record for the most appearances, with 139, and Steven Gerrard is the club's record goalscorer, with 38 goals. (Full article...)
Recently featured: Interstate 80 Business (West Wendover, Nevada–Wendover, Utah) – 2005 Qeshm earthquake – Verpa bohemica
Did you know...
In the news
On this day...
February 12: Mardi Gras and Shrove Tuesday in Western Christianity (2013); Darwin Day; Red Hand Day
1541 – Spanish conquistador Pedro de Valdivia founded Santiago, today the capital of Chile, as Santiago del Nuevo Extremo.
1855 – Michigan State University in East Lansing, Michigan, was founded as the Agricultural College of the State of Michigan, the United States' first agricultural college.
1912 – Xinhai Revolution: Puyi, the last Emperor of China, abdicated under a deal brokered by military official and politician Yuan Shikai, formally replacing the Qing Dynasty with a new republic in China.
1974 – Russian author Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn was arrested and subsequently deported from the Soviet Union for writing The Gulag Archipelago, an exposé of the Soviet forced labour camp system.
2001 – NASA's robotic space probe NEAR Shoemaker touched down on Eros (pictured), becoming the first spacecraft to land on an asteroid.
More anniversaries: February 11 – February 12 – February 13
 
 Other areas of Wikipedia 
 Community portal – Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas.
Help desk – Ask questions about using Wikipedia.
Local embassy – For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English.
Reference desk – Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects.
Site news – Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation.
Village pump – For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies.
  
 
 Wikipedia's sister projects 
 Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects: 
 
 
 Wikipedia languages 
 
 This Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001 (2001), it currently contains 4,164,169 articles. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   