  
 The 2005 United States Grand Prix was one of the most controversial Formula One motor races in modern history. It was held on June 19, 2005 at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway and was the ninth race of the 2005 Formula One season. Out of 20 cars entered for the race, only the six cars from the teams using Bridgestone tyres (Ferrari, Minardi and Jordan) competed. The remaining fourteen entrants, all using Michelin tyres, completed the parade lap (thus having technically taken part in the race, avoiding punishment), but retired to the pits before the race started. 
 Following several tyre failures before the race, most spectacularly on Ralf Schumacher's Toyota during Friday practice, Michelin advised its seven customer teams that the tyres provided for the race were not safe to use for the entire race, even though they had been providing working tyres for the race since 2001. The situation was worsened by the 2005 Formula 1 rules, which forbade tyre changes during the race; and also by a resurfacing of the circuit, which resulted in greater tyre wear. 
 The Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA), the sport's governing body, refused a compromise proposal from Michelin to allow a chicane to be installed, maintaining that such rule changes would be grossly unfair to the Bridgestone-shod teams, who had come prepared with properly working tyres, and that a last-minute change to the track layout would be dangerous in case of crashes. The Michelin teams, unable to come to a compromise with the FIA, decided not to participate. 
 Of the six competitors, Ferrari's Michael Schumacher was the eventual winner, with his team mate Rubens Barrichello finishing second. The result significantly boosted his championship standing, placing him third overall – no driver above him in the table took part in the race.[1] It also had a significant effect on the outcome of the 2005 Constructors' Championship; without the easy 18 points Ferrari gained from this race they almost certainly would have finished below Toyota at the end of the season. Although controversial, it was the 24th and last one-two finish for Ferrari team mates Michael Schumacher and Rubens Barrichello. They remain the most successful Formula One team mates, as far as one-two finishes are concerned. The situation created enormous negative publicity for the sport of Formula One, especially in the United States, a market in which Formula One had struggled to establish itself over the preceding 20 years, leading some to label the race as "Indygate".[2] This race also marked the Toyota team's first Formula One pole position. 
 [edit] Qualifying 
 The qualifying session for the United States Grand Prix was held on June 18. Jarno Trulli gained the pole position by posting the fastest lap time, 1:10.625. Trulli, driving for Toyota, was the team's first driver to win the pole position for a Formula One race.[3] The second-place qualifier was Kimi Räikkönen, who ran a lap of 1:10.694. Jenson Button, Giancarlo Fisichella, and Michael Schumacher were the next three fastest qualifiers. Fernando Alonso, who led the season point standings, qualified in sixth. The rest of the top 10 consisted of Rubens Barrichello, Takuma Sato, Mark Webber, and Felipe Massa.[3] 
 [edit] Pre-race controversy 
 [edit] Michelin tyre failures 
 On Friday, June 17, 2005, during the afternoon's practice session, Ralf Schumacher driving for Toyota, crashed badly in Turn 13 of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway road course, apparently as a result of a left-rear tyre failure. He was unable to continue competing, and was replaced by the team's test driver, Ricardo Zonta for the rest of the weekend. Ralf Schumacher had crashed at high speed at Turn 13 the previous year while driving for the Williams team.[4] Turn 13 on the Indianapolis Motor Speedway road course is a high speed banked turn, unique in Formula One racing, which causes a greater than usual tyre loading.[5] On June 18, Michelin reported that it did not understand why the tyres it had provided for its seven customer teams – BAR, McLaren, Red Bull, Renault, Toyota, Sauber, and Williams – had failed in this turn, and announced its intention to fly in tyres of a different specification from its Clermont-Ferrand headquarters.[6] Unfortunately, the replacement tyres flown in, which were of the type used in the Spanish Grand Prix earlier that year, turned out to have the same problem when tested.[8] 
 [edit] Correspondence between Michelin and the FIA 
 In a letter to FIA Race Director Charlie Whiting, dated Saturday, June 18, Michelin representatives Pierre Dupasquier and Nick Shorrock revealed that they did not know the cause of the Toyota tyre failures, and unless the cars could be slowed down in Turn 13, they could not guarantee the tyres' safety for more than 10 laps.[8] Whiting replied on Sunday, June 19, expressing his surprise that Michelin had not brought suitable tyres, suggesting that the teams should limit their drivers to the maximum safe speed specified by Michelin in Turn 13. He also addressed several solutions which had been proposed by the teams, insisting that use of the new specification tyres flown in overnight would be "a breach of the rules to be considered by the stewards", and the placement of a chicane in the turn was "out of the question" – the race would not be sanctioned by the FIA (making it a non-championship race) if the track layout was changed. He deemed the Michelin teams' proposals to be "grossly unfair" to the Bridgestone teams.[9] 
 In a second letter, also dated June 19, Dupasquier and Shorrock confirmed that they would not permit their teams to race on the Michelin tyres used during qualification without changes to the circuit, and reiterated their request to slow down Turn 13. Whiting's brief reply maintained that no such change would be permitted, and gave the teams the choice of limiting speeds through Turn 13, using tyres of a different specification to those used in qualifying, subject to a penalty, or changing tyres repeatedly, which is permitted if a driver's safety is at issue.[10] 
 [edit] Attempts at compromise 
 Paul Stoddart, then owner of Minardi, a team using Bridgestone tyres, published an account on Wednesday, June 22, of the events leading up to the race. Stoddart recorded a meeting around 10:00am on the day of the race, to which Speedway president Tony George, "the two most senior Michelin representatives present at the circuit", Bernie Ecclestone (president and CEO of Formula One Management and Formula One Administration), the team principals, and the teams' Michelin technical representatives were summoned. All invited were present except Jean Todt, Team Principal of Scuderia Ferrari. 
 By Stoddart's account, the meeting proceeded as follows: The Michelin representatives stated their position that the tyres provided to the teams could not safely complete the race distance, and requested that the Bridgestone teams, represented by Stoddart and Jordan's Colin Kolles, permit the installation of a chicane in Turn 13. Those present discussed and agreed to reject the FIA's solution of speed-limiting the Michelin cars in the turn because of the potential for accidents. They likewise dismissed the possibility of making pit stops every ten laps, resolved that a chicane was the best solution, and instructed several technical representatives to prepare plans for its installation. Bernie Ecclestone volunteered to consult Todt, who had not come to the meeting, and the president of the FIA, Max Mosley, who was not present at the race, and reconvene the meeting when he had responses. 
 Ecclestone returned at about 10:55 to inform the group that Todt had refused to agree to the chicane, maintaining that it was an FIA and a Michelin problem and not his. By the time Stoddart's account of the meeting was published, Todt had already denied that he had ever been consulted, but stated that, if asked, he would not have agreed to the chicane.[11] Furthermore, Ecclestone reported that "Mr Mosley had stated that if any attempts were made to alter the circuit, he would cancel the Grand Prix forthwith". 
 [edit] Team principals' plan 
 The group, according to Stoddart, continued to propose alternate solutions, including "a non-championship race, or a race in which the Michelin teams could not score points, and even a race whereby only the Michelin teams used the new chicane", but eventually agreed that the best option was to install the chicane and run a non-championship race, without Ferrari if necessary.[12] To ignore the FIA's instructions and carry on the race would have resulted in the FIA's withdrawing its staff, so the group appointed delegates to fill the various offices, including a race director to replace Charlie Whiting and a safety car driver to replace Bernd Mayländer. The team principals were instructed to convey to their teams and drivers that, in the absence of FIA scrutineers and equipment, the technical rules could not be enforced, and that they were to conduct themselves honourably and in the interest of an entertaining race.[12] 
 They proceeded to summon the twenty drivers and present their plan. Of the drivers' opinions, Stoddart writes: "While I cannot testify that each and every driver agreed with what we were proposing, what I can say with certainty is that no driver disagreed." The Ferrari drivers expressed no opinion in the matter, leaving the decision to Todt, who was not present. The nine present team principals thereupon resolved that, unless they and the FIA could come to a decision in the interest of the sport, they would not participate in the race.[12] 
 After a short break, the group gathered again in Ecclestone's office to find Renault team principal Flavio Briatore on the phone with Max Mosley. Mosley had apparently rejected all of their proposals, and indeed "it was stated that Mosley had informed Mr Martin, the FIA's most senior representative in the USA, that if any kind of non-championship race was run, or any alteration made to the circuit, the US Grand Prix, and indeed, all FIA-regulated motorsport in the US, would be under threat". On the same day that Stoddart's version of events was published, the FIA issued a statement denying that Mosley had made the reported threat, or that any such conversation had taken place.[13] 
 Having exhausted their options, the Michelin team principals, Stoddart, and Bernie Ecclestone – but not Jordan's Colin Kolles – discussed whether their cars should proceed to the grid, and decided that they should participate in the formation lap but that they could not race. Stoddart asked Kolles if he would be entering his cars and was informed that Jordan would indeed be racing, despite having previously agreed not to. Stoddart was then approached by a Bridgestone representative and told that Bridgestone wanted him to race; He has also stated that given his "current relationship with Mr Mosley, [he] felt certain heavy sanctions would follow if [he] did not [race]." Stoddart too decided to enter his drivers, but reported that he would retire them if the Jordans did not finish the race.[12] 
 [edit] Race report 
 At the start of the race, all the cars lined up on the grid per FIA race procedure. As Charlie Whiting signalled the green light to start the formation lap, a full field of twenty cars set off as normal for a single lap before forming the starting grid. At the banked Turn 13, the entrance to the pit lane (and the turn that was the centre of the controversy), all teams that ran Michelin tyres returned to their pits, leaving just six cars from the three Bridgestone teams (Ferrari, Jordan, and Minardi) to start the race.[14] 
 The move by the teams, to come to the grid and then pull out after the formation lap into the pits, infuriated the fans, who did not know about the plan.[15][16] Boos were heard during the race, and some upset fans threw beer cans and water bottles on the track.[17]BBC Radio broadcaster Maurice Hamilton said of the event, "Without question, it was the strangest race I commentated on in F1."[16] Because of the retirement of the drivers who qualified ahead of him, Michael Schumacher assumed the pole position for the start of the race. His Ferrari teammate, Barrichello, started next to him in the front row; the pair were followed by Tiago Monteiro and Narain Karthikeyan, both driving for Jordan. Rounding out the remaining field of six were Christijan Albers and Patrick Friesacher of Minardi. Schumacher retained the lead when the race started, and the only changes in positioning came when Albers and Karthikeyen exchanged passes.[18] The two Ferrari drivers quickly built a significant lead over their rivals, and Schumacher ended up with the victory, ahead of Barrichello. Monteiro and Karthikeyan finished in a distant third and fourth, and Albers and Friesacher brought up the rear.[19][20] 
 The race was a story of pit strategy, as the only passing on the circuit was of lapped traffic. Albers was the only car to run a three pit stop race, as all other drivers chose to stop only twice. The only lead changes came on lap 26, as Schumacher's 32-second stop gave Barrichello the lead, and on lap 51, as Schumacher turned in the quickest pit stop at 23.615 seconds, giving him enough time to exit pit lane at the same time as Barrichello, with the result of forcing Barrichello into the grass of Turn One. After this incident, which was not investigated by race officials, both Ferrari drivers were reminded over their radios not to crash out of the race, and they both settled into a slower pace, comfortably ahead of the rest of the field.[14] All four of the drivers for Jordan and Minardi scored their first points in Formula One at this race.[20] Karthikeyan's points were the first for an Indian driver in Formula One.[21] This was also the final race at which the Minardi team tallied points.[22] 
 At the podium ceremony, at which none of the scheduled dignitaries were present, all Ferrari team members quietly accepted their awards, and quickly exited. However, Monteiro stayed behind to celebrate his first podium finish, and the first for a Portuguese driver.[14] 
 [edit] Aftermath 
 The win, Schumacher's only victory of 2005, moved him from fifth to third in the drivers championship.[23][24] Alonso and Räikkönen remained first and second in the championship standings, on 59 and 37 points respectively, while Schumacher moved up to 34 points.[18][25] With his second-place finish, Barrichello went into fourth in the drivers championship, on 29 points, and Trulli dropped to fifth with 27 points.[18] The Ferrari team moved into joint second in the Constructors' Championship, matching McLaren with 63 points; both teams trailed Renault, which retained the lead on 76 points. Both Jordan and Minardi scored points, moving out of a tie with BAR-Honda at the bottom of the constructor standings.[20] However, the results of the United States Grand Prix were overshadowed by the withdrawal of the Michelin-shod teams, and by the inability to find a solution which would have allowed them to race.[16][19] 
 Bernie Ecclestone, in answer to a question by ITV's Martin Brundle in an interview just before the start of the race, described the future of Formula One in the United States and the future of Michelin in the sport as "not good". He also said that the "incident's not the fault of the teams, to be honest with you."[26] 
 The race was labelled a farce, and David Coulthard said, "It throws into doubt the future of the race in US".[8] Some pointed to the previous disagreements between the teams and Max Mosley (which had led to the threatened creation of the Grand Prix World Championship as an alternative to Formula One) as a critical factor in the failure to reach a compromise and felt that the events at this race had greatly increased the risk of a complete rupture.[27] 
 Minardi boss Paul Stoddart said immediately after the race that nine teams – all but Ferrari – agreed not to race, and had Jordan not reversed its decision at the last minute, Minardi would also have boycotted the race.[28] In his later, lengthier, statement, he indicated that although it had been Michelin's failure to provide a reliable tyre which had initiated the events, he laid the full blame for the failure to reach some accommodation (which would have allowed a race to happen, for the benefit of the many fans who had paid considerable money for travel and tickets) at the feet of Max Mosley and the FIA, with a small share of the blame going to what he characterized as the obstructionist Ferrari team leader, Jean Todt. He furthermore called for Mosley's resignation.[29] 
 [edit] FIA's reaction 
 The following day, the FIA published a justification of its refusal to permit a change in tyres or the installation of a chicane.[30] The FIA also summoned the seven Michelin-shod teams before the World Motorsport Council at their headquarters in France, for a hearing on June 29, to explain their failure to participate, by which they had presumably violated the terms of the Concorde Agreement.[31] It later published copies of the letters sent to each team "in the interests of transparency".[32] They were charged with violating article 151c of the International Sporting Code, which refers to acts prejudicial to the interests of competition or motorsport generally.[33] Specifically, it was charged that they had: 
 Failed to ensure availability of suitable tyres for the race.
Wrongfully refused to allow cars to start the race
Wrongfully refused to allow cars to race subject to speed restrictions at one corner, which was safe for such tyres available.
Combined with other teams to make a demonstration damaging to the image of Formula 1 by pulling into the pits immediately before the start of the race.
Failed to notify the stewards of intention not to race.
  On June 22 the FIA produced a press release from Max Mosley, in the form of a question-and-answer session, in an effort to clarify the FIA's stand on the controversy.[34] In it Mosley drew an analogy to a hypothetical situation where the engines from one manufacturer had oil starvation problems due to high lateral loading in one corner, and pointed out that those cars would simply have been forced to run slower as a result. He reiterated that the reason for not installing the chicane was purely that it had never been tested and was thereby deemed unsafe. He pointed out that the alternatives that the FIA suggested were feasible, and wondered why the teams did not use the pitlane as an alternative, especially when, with only six Bridgestone cars, the Michelin teams could still compete for the points scoring seventh and eighth places.[35] 
 On June 29 the FIA World Motorsport Council found the teams guilty on the first two counts, that is, of not being in possession of suitable tyres for the event, but with strong mitigating circumstances, and that of wrongfully refusing to allow their cars to start the race. The teams were found not guilty of the other three counts. The punishment, however, was not decided, and was not to have been announced until September 14.[36] 
 On July 22, the FIA World Motorsport Council voted to overturn its previous decision, and exonerated the Michelin teams of all charges. The decision was due to "evidence previously submitted to the FIA Senate",[37] rumoured to be that the Michelin teams could have faced criminal charges under Indiana state law for knowingly putting others at risk if they had raced (even if no accident actually occurred).[38] 
 [edit] Compensation 
 On June 28, Michelin announced that it would offer compensation to all race fans who had purchased tickets for the Grand Prix.[39] By the end of September, the company had issued refund cheques through the Speedway ticket office for the price of all tickets for the race. Additionally, Michelin purchased 20,000 tickets for the 2006 United States Grand Prix to be distributed to spectators who renewed their 2005 ticket orders for the event, two additional tickets per order.[40] 
 In addition to the refunded tickets, there was some discussion about holding a second, non-championship race at Indianapolis. On July 2, at the 2005 French Grand Prix, McLaren team principal Ron Dennis suggested that an additional race could be held at the American circuit after the last official race of the season, in Shanghai. The teams had, apparently, already discussed the idea with Bernie Ecclestone. But the next day Tony George dismissed the possibility: "There will be no race at Indianapolis Motor Speedway this fall."[41] At the 2005 Champ Car World Series Grand Prix of Cleveland, held one week after the US Grand Prix, free admission was granted to all bearers of ticket stubs of the US Grand Prix.[42] 
 [edit] Friday drivers 
 Teams that were not in the top four of the 2004 Constructors' Championship standings were entitled to run a third car in free practice on Friday.[43] These drivers drove on Friday but did not compete in qualifying or the race.[3][44][45] 
 [edit] Classification 
 [edit] Qualifying 
 [edit] Standings after the race 
 Note: Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings.
 [edit] References 
 
 ^ "Schumacher claims farcical US win". BBC. June 19, 2005. http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/motorsport/formula_one/4109556.stm. Retrieved October 28, 2007.
^ "'Indygate’ lawsuit dismissed". ITV. June 17, 2006. Retrieved January 26, 2013.
^ a b c Fryer, Jenna (June 19, 2005). "Trulli wins pole for F1 United States Grand Prix". USA Today. Associated Press. Retrieved December 15, 2012.
^ "Double Toyota tyre failure worries Michelin.". Crash.net. June 18, 2005. Retrieved December 2, 2006.
^ "Michelin: Tyres not flawed, just unsuitable.". Crash.net. June 27, 2005. Retrieved January 26, 2013.
^ "Michelin looking to fly in new tyres". ITV. June 18, 2005. Retrieved January 26, 2013.
^ a b c Garside, Kevin (June 20, 2005). "Day of shame for F1". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved January 26, 2013.
^ "Letters between representatives of Michelin and Charlie Whiting, the FIA Formula One Race Director". NewsonF1.net. June 19, 2005. Retrieved August 5, 2006.
^ "Further correspondence between representatives of Michelin in Indianapolis and the FIA Formula One Race Director". NewsonF1.net. June 19, 2005. Retrieved August 5, 2006.
^ "Todt:Chicane plan was 'ridiculous'". ITV. June 21, 2005. Retrieved January 26, 2013.
^ a b c d "Nine of ten teams had planned for non-FIA USGP.". Crash.net. June 22, 2005. Retrieved January 26, 2013.
^ "FIA denies Stoddart claim". Grandprix.com. June 22, 2005. Retrieved August 5, 2006.
^ a b c "Schumacher takes hollow USGP victory.". Crash.net. June 19, 2005. Retrieved November 30, 2006.
^ Herman, Steve (June 20, 2005). "Fans outraged by depleted U.S. Grand Prix field". USA Today. Associated Press. Retrieved December 15, 2012.
^ a b c Holt, Sarah (November 8, 2012). "The strangest race in Formula One history?". CNN. Retrieved December 15, 2012.
^ Williams, Richard (June 20, 2005). "Motor Racing: United States grand prix: The last vestiges of credibility are lost in a volley of beer cans and boos". The Guardian: p. 5.
^ a b c "Ferrari win six-car Indianapolis race". Formula One. June 19, 2005. Retrieved December 16, 2012.
^ a b Caldwell, Dave (June 20, 2005). "U.S. Grand Prix Never Gets Into Gear". The New York Times. Retrieved December 16, 2012.
^ a b c "Race analysis – Ferrari's hollow victory". Formula One. Retrieved December 16, 2012.
^ "Motorsport – Tyre controversy leaves Formula One in disarray". The News Letter. June 20, 2005. p. 38.
^ Vigar, Simon. Forza Minardi!: The Inside Story of the Little Team Which Took on the Giants of F1. Veloce Publishing Ltd., 2008. p. 104. ISBN 9781845841607.
^ "2005 FIA Formula One World Championship". Formula One. Retrieved December 17, 2012.
^ "Michael Schumacher wins US Grand Prix marred by tyre fiasco". Daily Times. June 21, 2005. Retrieved December 17, 2012.
^ "Michelin cars pull off track after warmups". ESPN. Associated Press. June 19, 2005. Retrieved December 18, 2012.
^ "Brundle vs Bernie". ITV. Retrieved January 26, 2013.
^ "James Allen's verdict". ITV. Retrieved August 5, 2006.
^ "Angry Stoddart criticises Jordan". ITV. June 19, 2005. Retrieved January 26, 2013.
^ "Stoddart: What really happened at Indy...". Crash.net. June 22, 2005. Retrieved January 26, 2013.
^ "2005 United States Grand Prix". Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile. June 20, 2005. Retrieved January 26, 2013.
^ "FIA World Motorsport Council". Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile. June 20, 2005. Retrieved January 26, 2013.
^ "United States Grand Prix - World Motor Sport Council". NewsonF1.net. June 21, 2005. Retrieved August 5, 2006.
^ "FIA charges Michelin teams". ITV. June 22, 2005. Retrieved January 26, 2013.
^ "Mosley comments on US Grand Prix". Motorsport.com. June 23, 2005. Retrieved August 5, 2006.
^ "Questions to Max Mosley – the US Grand Prix". Formula One. June 23, 2005. Retrieved December 24, 2012.
^ "World Motor Sport Council Hearing of the Michelin Formula One teams decision". Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile. June 29, 2005. Retrieved January 26, 2013.
^ "FIA World Motor Sport Council decision". Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile. July 22, 2005. Retrieved January 26, 2013.
^ "Michelin teams exonerated on Indy". BBC. July 22, 2005. Retrieved August 5, 2006.
^ Caldwell, Dave (June 29, 2005). "Michelin Offers Refunds to U.S. Grand Prix Fans". The New York Times. Retrieved December 24, 2012.
^ "Michelin pleased with dismissed Indy lawsuit". Yahoo! Sports. Retrieved November 29, 2006.
^ "Tony George says "No"". Grandprix.com. July 3, 2005. Retrieved December 7, 2006.
^ "Champ Car to honour US GP tickets in Cleveland.". Crash.net. June 20, 2005. Retrieved January 26, 2013.
^ "McLaren will run third car in 2005". Formula One. January 25, 2005. Retrieved December 19, 2012.
^ "2005 United States Grand Prix: Fri Prac 2". Formula One. Retrieved December 19, 2012.
^ "2005 United States Grand Prix: Race". Formula One. Retrieved December 19, 2012.
  
 [edit] External links 
 Coordinates: 39°47′42″N 86°14′05″W﻿ / ﻿39.795°N 86.23472°W﻿ / 39.795; -86.23472 
  