  
 The East End of London, also known simply as the East End, is the area of London, England, east of the medieval walled City of London and north of the River Thames. Although not defined by universally accepted formal boundaries, the River Lea can be considered another boundary.[1] For the purposes of his book, East End Past, Richard Tames regards the area as coterminous with the London Borough of Tower Hamlets: however, he acknowledges that this narrow definition excludes parts of southern Hackney, such as Shoreditch and Hoxton, which many would regard as belonging to the East End.[2] Others again, such as Alan Palmer, would extend the area across the Lea to include parts of the London Borough of Newham;[3] while parts of the London Borough of Waltham Forest are also sometimes included. It is universally agreed, however, that the East End is to be distinguished from East London, which covers a much wider area. 
 Use of the term East End in a pejorative sense began in the late 19th century,[4] as the expansion of the population of London led to extreme overcrowding throughout the area and a concentration of poor people and immigrants.[5] The problems were exacerbated with the construction of St Katharine Docks (1827)[6] and the central London railway termini (1840–1875) that caused the clearance of former slums and rookeries, with many of the displaced people moving into the East End. Over the course of a century, the East End became synonymous with poverty, overcrowding, disease and criminality.[3] 
 The East End developed rapidly during the 19th century. Originally it was an area characterised by villages clustered around the City walls or along the main roads, surrounded by farmland, with marshes and small communities by the River, serving the needs of shipping and the Royal Navy. Until the arrival of formal docks, shipping was required to land its goods in the Pool of London, but industries related to construction, repair, and victualling of ships flourished in the area from Tudor times. The area attracted large numbers of rural people looking for employment. Successive waves of foreign immigration began with Huguenot refugees creating a new extramural suburb in Spitalfields in the 17th century.[7] They were followed by Irish weavers,[8]Ashkenazi Jews[9] and, in the 20th century, Bangladeshis.[10] Many of these immigrants worked in the clothing industry. The abundance of semi- and unskilled labour led to low wages and poor conditions throughout the East End. This brought the attentions of social reformers during the mid-18th century and led to the formation of unions and workers associations at the end of the century. The radicalism of the East End contributed to the formation of the Labour Party, and Emmeline Pankhurst based campaigns for women's votes in the area. 
 Official attempts to address the overcrowded housing began at the beginning of the 20th century under the London County Council. The Second World War devastated much of the East End, with its docks, railways and industry forming a continual target for bombing, especially during the Blitz, leading to dispersal of the population to new suburbs and new housing being built in the 1950s.[3] The closure of the last of the East End docks in the Port of London in 1980 created further challenges and led to attempts at regeneration and the formation of the London Docklands Development Corporation. The Canary Wharf development, improved infrastructure, and the Olympic Park[11] mean that the East End is undergoing further change, but some parts continue to contain some of the worst poverty in Britain.[12] 
 [edit] Origin and scope 
 The term 'East End' was first applied to the districts immediately to the east of, and entirely outside, the medieval walled City of London and north of the River Thames; these included Whitechapel and Stepney. By the late 19th century, the East End roughly corresponded to the Tower division of Middlesex, which from 1900 formed the metropolitan boroughs of Stepney, Bethnal Green, Poplar and Shoreditch in the County of London. Today it corresponds to the London Borough of Tower Hamlets and the southern part of Hackney.[3] 
 
[The] invention about 1880 of the term 'East End' was rapidly taken up by the new halfpenny press, and in the pulpit and the music hall ... A shabby man from Paddington, St Marylebone or Battersea might pass muster as one of the respectable poor. But the same man coming from Bethnal Green, Shadwell or Wapping was an 'East Ender', the box of Keating's bug powder must be reached for, and the spoons locked up. In the long run this cruel stigma came to do good. It was a final incentive to the poorest to get out of the 'East End' at all costs, and it became a concentrated reminder to the public conscience that nothing to be found in the 'East End' should be tolerated in a Christian country.
—The Nineteenth Century XXIV (1888), [13]
 
 Parts of the London boroughs of Newham and Waltham Forest, formerly in an area of Essex known as 'London over the border', are sometimes considered to be in the East End.[14] However, the River Lea is usually considered to be the eastern boundary of the East End[1] and this definition would exclude the boroughs, but place them in east London.[15] This extension of the term further east is due to the 'diaspora' of East Enders who moved to West Ham about 1886[16] and East Ham about 1894[17] to service the new docks and industries established there. In the inter-war period, migration occurred to new estates built to alleviate conditions in the East End, in particular at Becontree and Harold Hill, or out of London entirely. 
 The extent of the East End has always been difficult to define. When Jack London came to London in 1902 his Hackney carriage driver did not know the way and he observed, "Thomas Cook and Son, path-finders and trail-clearers, living sign-posts to all the World.... knew not the way to the East End".[18] 
 Many East Enders are 'Cockneys', although this term has both a geographic and a linguistic connotation. A traditional definition is that to be a Cockney, one had to be born within the sound of Bow Bells, situated in Cheapside. In general, the sound pattern would cover most of the City, and parts of the near East End such as Aldgate and Whitechapel. In practice, with no maternity hospitals in the district, today few would be born in the area. The origin of the term is lost, but a plausible explanation is given by Websters.[19] London was referred to by the Normans as the "Land of Sugar Cake" (Old French: pais de cocaigne), an imaginary land of idleness and luxury. A humorous appellation, the word "Cocaigne" referred to all of London and its suburbs, and over time had a number of spellings: Cocagne, Cockayne', and in Middle English, Cocknay and Cockney. 
 Its linguistic use is more identifiable, with lexical borrowings from Yiddish, Romani, and costermonger slang, and a distinctive accent that features T-glottalization, a loss of dental fricatives and diphthong alterations, amongst others. The accent is said to be a remnant of early English London speech, modified by the many immigrants to the area.[20] The Cockney accent has suffered a long decline, beginning with the introduction in the 20th century of received pronunciation, and the more recent adoption of Estuary English, which itself contains many features of Cockney English.[21] 
 [edit] History 
 The East End came into being as the separate villages east of London spread and the fields between them were built upon, a process that occurred in the late 18th and early 19th centuries. From the beginning, the East End has always contained some of the poorest areas of London. The main reasons for this include the following: 
 the medieval system of copyhold, which prevailed throughout the East End, into the 19th century. Essentially, there was little point in developing land that was held on short leases.[3]
the siting of noxious industries, such as tanning and fulling downwind outside the boundaries of the City, and therefore beyond complaints and official controls.
the low paid employment in the docks and related industries, made worse by the trade practices of outwork, piecework and casual labour.
and the concentration of the ruling court and national political epicentre in Westminster, on the opposite western side of the City of London.
  Historically, the East End is conterminous with the Manor of Stepney. This manor was held by the Bishop of London, in compensation for his duties in maintaining and garrisoning the Tower of London. Further ecclesiastic holdings came about from the need to enclose the marshes and create flood defences along the Thames. Edward VI passed the land to the Wentworth family, and thence to their descendants, the Earls of Cleveland. The ecclesiastic system of copyhold, whereby land was leased to tenants for terms as short as seven years, prevailed throughout the manor. This severely limited scope for improvement of the land and new building until the estate was broken up in the 19th century.[22] 
 In medieval times trades were carried out in workshops in and around the owners' premises in the City. By the time of the Great Fire these were becoming industries and some were particularly noisome, such as the processing of urine to perform tanning; or required large amounts of space, such as drying clothes after process and dying in fields known as tentergrounds; and rope making. Some were dangerous, such as the manufacture of gun powder or the proving of guns. These activities came to be performed outside the City walls in the near suburbs of the East End. Later when lead making and bone processing for soap and china came to be established, they too located in the East End rather than the crowded streets of the City.[3] 
 The lands to the east of the City had always been used as hunting grounds for bishops and royalty, with King John establishing a palace at Bow. The Cistercian Stratford Langthorne Abbey became the court of Henry III in 1267 for the visitation of the Papal legates, and it was here that he made peace with the barons under the terms of the Dictum of Kenilworth. It became the fifth largest Abbey in the country, visited by monarchs and providing a popular retreat (and final resting place) for the nobility.[23] The Palace of Placentia at Greenwich, to the south of the river, was built by the Regent to Henry V, Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester and Henry VIII established a hunting lodge at Bromley Hall.[24] These Royal connections continued until after the Interregnum when the Court established itself in the Palace of Whitehall and the offices of politics congregated around them. The East End also lay on the main road to Barking Abbey, important as a religious centre since Norman times and where William the Conqueror had first established his English court.[25] 
 [edit] Politics and social reform 
 At the end of the 17th century large numbers of Huguenot weavers arrived in the East End, settling to service an industry that grew up around the new estate at Spitalfields, where master weavers were based. They brought with them a tradition of 'reading clubs', where books were read, often in public houses. The authorities were suspicious of immigrants meeting and in some ways they were right to be as these grew into workers' associations and political organisations. Towards the middle of the 18th century the silk industry fell into a decline - partly due to the introduction of printed calico cloth - and riots ensued. These 'Spitalfield Riots' of 1769 were actually centred to the east and were put down with considerable force, culminating in two men being hanged in front of the Salmon and Ball public house at Bethnal Green. One was John Doyle (an Irish weaver), the other John Valline (of Huguenot descent).[26] 
 In 1844, "An Association for promoting Cleanliness among the Poor" was established, and it built a bath-house and laundry in Glasshouse Yard, East Smithfield. This cost a single penny for bathing or washing and by June 1847 was receiving 4,284 people a year. This led to an Act of Parliament to encourage other municipalities to build their own and the model spread quickly throughout the East End. Timbs noted that "... so strong was the love of cleanliness thus encouraged that women often toiled to wash their own and their children's clothing, who had been compelled to sell their hair to purchase food to satisfy the cravings of hunger".[27] 
 William Booth began his 'Christian Revival Society' in 1865, preaching the gospel in a tent erected in the 'Friends Burial Ground', Thomas Street, Whitechapel. Others joined his 'Christian Mission', and on 7 August 1878 the Salvation Army was formed at a meeting held at 272 Whitechapel Road.[28] A statue commemorates both his mission and his work in helping the poor. Dubliner Thomas John Barnardo came to the London Hospital, Whitechapel to train for medical missionary work in China. Soon after his arrival in 1866 a cholera epidemic swept the East End killing 3,000 people. Many families were left destitute, with thousands of children orphaned and forced to beg or find work in the factories. In 1867, Barnardo set up a Ragged School to provide a basic education but was shown the many children sleeping rough. His first home for boys was established at 18 Stepney Causeway in 1870. When a boy died after being turned away (the home was full), the policy was instituted that 'No Destitute Child Ever Refused Admission'.[29] 
 In 1884, the Settlement movement was founded, with settlements such as Toynbee Hall[30] and Oxford House, to encourage university students to live and work in the slums, experience the conditions and try to alleviate some of the poverty and misery in the East End. Notable residents of Toynbee Hall included R. H. Tawney, Clement Attlee, Guglielmo Marconi, and William Beveridge. The Hall continues to exert considerable influence, with the Workers Educational Association (1903), Citizens Advice Bureau (1949) and Child Poverty Action Group (1965) all being founded or influenced by it.[31] In 1888, the matchgirls of Bryant and May in Bow went on strike for better working conditions. This, combined with the many dock strikes in the same era, made the East End a key element in the foundation of modern socialist and trade union organisations, as well as the Suffragette movement.[32] 
 Towards the end of the 19th century, a new wave of radicalism came to the East End, arriving both with Jewish émigrés fleeing from Eastern European persecution, and Russian and German radicals avoiding arrest. A German émigré anarchist, Rudolf Rocker, began writing in Yiddish for Arbayter Fraynd (Workers' Friend). By 1912, he had organised a mass London garment workers' strike for better conditions and an end to 'sweating'.[33] Amongst the Russians was fellow anarchist Peter Kropotkin who helped found the Freedom Press in Whitechapel. Afanasy Matushenko, one of the leaders of the Potemkin mutiny, fled the failure of the Russian Revolution of 1905 to seek sanctuary in Stepney Green.[34]Leon Trotsky and Vladimir Lenin attended meetings of the newspaper Iskra in 1903. in Whitechapel; and in 1907 Lenin and Joseph Stalin[35][36] attended the Fifth Congress of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party held in a Hoxton church. That congress consolidated the leadership of Lenin's Bolshevik faction and debated strategy for the communist revolution in Russia.[37] Trotsky noted, in his memoires, meeting Maxim Gorky and Rosa Luxembourg at the conference.[38] 
 By the 1880s, the casual system caused Dock workers to unionise under Ben Tillett and John Burns.[39] This led to a demand for '6d per hour' (The Docker's Tanner),[40] and an end to casual labour in the docks.[41] Colonel G. R. Birt, the general manager at Millwall Docks, gave evidence to a Parliamentary committee, on the physical condition of the workers: 
 
The poor fellows are miserably clad, scarcely with a boot on their foot, in a most miserable state.... These are men who come to work in our docks who come on without having a bit of food in their stomachs, perhaps since the previous day; they have worked for an hour and have earned 5d. [2p]; their hunger will not allow them to continue: they take the 5d. in order that they may get food, perhaps the first food they have had for twenty-four hours.
—Col. G. R. Birt, in evidence to the Parliamentary Committee (1889), [41]
 
 These conditions earned dockers much public sympathy, and after a bitter struggle, the London Dock Strike of 1889 was settled with victory for the strikers, and established a national movement for the unionisation of casual workers, as opposed to the craft unions that already existed. 
 The philanthropist Angela Burdett-Coutts was active in the East End, alleviating poverty by founding a sewing school for ex-weavers in Spitalfields and building the ornate Columbia Market in Bethnal Green. She helped to inaugurate the London Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, was a keen supporter of the 'Ragged School Union',[42] and operated housing schemes similar to those of the Model Dwellings Companies such as the East End Dwellings Company and the Four Per Cent Industrial Dwellings Company, where investors received a financial return on their philanthropy.[43] Between the 1890s and 1903, when the work was published, the social campaigner Charles Booth instigated an investigation into the life of London poor (based at Toynbee Hall), much of which was centred on the poverty and conditions in the East End.[44] Further investigations were instigated by the 'Royal Commission on the Poor Laws and Relief of Distress 1905-09', the Commission found it difficult to agree, beyond that change was necessary and produced separate minority and majority reports. The minority report was the work of Booth with the founders of the London School of Economics Sidney and Beatrice Webb. They advocated focusing on the causes of poverty and the radical notion of poverty being involuntary, rather than the result of innate indolence. At the time their work was rejected but was gradually adopted as policy by successive governments.[45] 
 Sylvia Pankhurst became increasingly disillusioned with the suffragette movement's inability to engage with the needs of working class women, so in 1912 she formed her own breakaway movement, the East London Federation of Suffragettes. She based it at a baker's shop at Bow emblazoned with the slogan, "Votes for Women", in large gold letters. The local Member of Parliament, George Lansbury, resigned his seat in the House of Commons to stand for election on a platform of women's enfranchisement. Pankhurst supported him in this, and Bow Road became the campaign office, culminating in a huge rally in nearby Victoria Park. Lansbury was narrowly defeated in the election, however, and support for the project in the East End was withdrawn. Pankhurst refocused her efforts, and with the outbreak of the First World War, she began a nursery, clinic and cost price canteen for the poor at the bakery. A paper, the Women's Dreadnought, was published to bring her campaign to a wider audience. Pankhurst spent twelve years in Bow fighting for women's rights. During this time, she risked constant arrest and spent many months in Holloway Prison, often on hunger strike. She finally achieved her aim of full adult female suffrage in 1928, and along the way she alleviated some of the poverty and misery, and improved social conditions for all in the East End.[46] 
 The alleviation of widespread unemployment and hunger in Poplar had to be funded from money raised by the borough itself under the Poor Law. The poverty of the borough made this patently unfair and lead to the 1921 conflict between government and the local councillors known as the Poplar Rates Rebellion. Council meetings were for a time held in Brixton prison, and the councillors received wide support.[47] Ultimately, this led to the abolition of the Poor Laws through the Local Government Act 1929. 
 The General Strike had begun as a dispute between miners and their employers outside London in 1925. On 1 May 1926 the Trades Union Congress called out workers all over the country, including the London dockers. The government had had over a year to prepare and deployed troops to break the dockers' picket lines. Armed food convoys, accompanied by armoured cars drove down the East India Dock Road. By 10 May, a meeting was brokered at Toynbee Hall to end the strike. The TUC were forced into a humiliating climbdown and the general strike ended on 11 May, with the miners holding out until November.[48] 
 [edit] Industry and built environment 
 Industries associated with the sea developed throughout the East End, including rope making and shipbuilding. The former location of roperies can still be identified from their long straight, narrow profile in the modern streets, for instance Ropery Street near Mile End. Shipbuilding was important from the time when Henry VIII caused ships to be built at Rotherhithe as a part of his expansion of the Royal Navy. On 31 January 1858, the largest ship of that time, the SS Great Eastern, designed by Isambard Kingdom Brunel, was launched from the yard of Messrs Scott Russell &amp; Co, of Millwall. The 692-foot (211 m) vessel was too long to fit across the river, and so the ship had to be launched sideways. Due to the technical difficulties of the launch, this was the last big ship to be built on the River, and the industry fell into a long decline.[49] Smaller ships, including battleships, continued to be built at the Thames Ironworks and Shipbuilding Company at Blackwall until the beginning of the 20th century. 
 The West India Docks were established in 1803, providing berths for larger ships and a model for future London dock building. Imported produce from the West Indies was unloaded directly into quayside warehouses. Ships were limited to 6000 tons.[50] The old Brunswick Dock, a shipyard at Blackwall became the basis for the East India Company's East India Docks established there in 1806.[51] The London Docks were built in 1805, and the waste soil and rubble from the construction was carried by barge to west London, to build up the marshy area of Pimlico. These docks imported tobacco, wine, wool and other goods into guarded warehouses within high walls (some of which still remain). They were able to berth over 300 sailing vessels simultaneously, but by 1971 they closed, no longer able to accommodate modern shipping.[52] The most central docks, St Katharine Docks, were built in 1828 to accommodate luxury goods, clearing the slums that lay in the area of the former Hospital of St Katharine. They were not successful commercially, as they were unable to accommodate the largest ships, and in 1864, management of the docks was amalgamated with that of the London Docks.[53] The Millwall Docks were created in 1868, predominantly for the import of grain and timber. These docks housed the first purpose built granary for the Baltic grain market, a local landmark that remained until it was demolished to improve access for the London City Airport.[54] 
 The first railway ('The Commercial Railway') to be built, in 1840, was a passenger service based on cable haulage by stationary steam engines that ran the 3.5 miles (5.6 km) from Minories to Blackwall on a pair of tracks. It required 14 miles (22.5 km) of hemp rope, and 'dropped' carriages as it arrived at stations, which were reattached to the cable for the return journey, and the train 'reassembling' itself at the terminus.[55] The line was converted to standard gauge in 1859, and steam locomotives adopted. The building of London termini at Fenchurch Street (1841),[56] and Bishopsgate (1840) provided access to new suburbs across the River Lea, again resulting in the destruction of housing and increased overcrowding in the slums. After the opening of Liverpool Street station (1874), Bishopsgate railway station became a goods yard, in 1881, to bring imports from Eastern ports. With the introduction of containerisation, the station declined, suffered a fire in 1964 that destroyed the station buildings, and it was finally demolished in 2004 for the extension of the East London Line. In the 19th century, the area north of Bow Road became a major railway centre for the North London Railway, with marshalling yards and a maintenance depot serving both the City and the West India docks. Nearby Bow railway station opened in 1850 and was rebuilt in 1870 in a grand style, featuring a concert hall. The line and yards closed in 1944, after severe bomb damage, and never reopened, as goods became less significant, and cheaper facilities were concentrated in Essex.[57] 
 The River Lea was a smaller boundary than the Thames, but it was a significant one. The building of the Royal Docks consisting of the Royal Victoria Dock (1855), able to berth vessels of up to 8000 tons;[58]Royal Albert Dock (1880), up to 12,000 tons;[59] and King George V Dock (1921), up to 30,000 tons,[60] on the estuary marshes, extended the continuous development of London across the Lea into Essex for the first time.[61] The railways gave access to a passenger terminal at Gallions Reach and new suburbs created in West Ham, which quickly became a major manufacturing town, with 30,000 houses built between 1871 and 1901.[16] Soon afterwards, East Ham was built up to serve the new Gas Light and Coke Company and Bazalgette's grand sewage works at Beckton.[17] 
 From the mid-20th century, the docks declined in use and were finally closed in 1980, leading to the setting up of the London Docklands Development Corporation in 1981.[62] London's main port is now at Tilbury, further down the Thames estuary, outside the boundary of Greater London. The dock had been established in 1886 to bring bulk goods by rail to London, but being nearer the sea and able to accommodate vessels of 50,000 tons, they were more easily converted to the needs of modern container ships in 1968, and so they survived the closure of the inner docks.[63] Various wharves along the river continue in use but on a much smaller scale. 
 [edit] Settlement 
 During the Middle Ages, settlements had been established predominantly along the lines of the existing roads, and the principal villages were Stepney, Whitechapel and Bow. Settlements along the river began at this time to service the needs of shipping on the Thames, but the City of London retained its right to actually land the goods. The riverside became more active in Tudor times, as the Royal Navy was expanded and international trading developed. Downstream, a major fishing port developed at Barking to provide fish to the City. 
 
 
 
Part of Charles Booth's poverty map showing the Old Nichol slum. Published 1889 in Life and Labour of the People in London. The red areas are "middle class, well-to-do", light blue areas are "poor, 18s to 21s a week for a moderate family", dark blue areas are "very poor, casual, chronic want", and black areas are the "lowest class...occasional labourers, street sellers, loafers, criminals and semi-criminals". 
 
 
 Whereas royalty such as King John had had a hunting lodge at Bromley-by-Bow, and the Bishop of London had a palace at Bethnal Green, later these estates began to be split up, and estates of fine houses for captains, merchants and owners of manufacturers began to be built. Samuel Pepys moved his family and goods to Bethnal Green during the Great Fire of London, and Captain Cook moved from Shadwell to Stepney Green, a place where a school and assembly rooms had been established (commemorated by Assembly Passage, and a plaque on the site of Cook's house on the Mile End Road). Mile End Old Town also acquired some fine buildings, and the New Town began to be built. As the area became built up and more crowded, the wealthy sold their plots for sub-division and moved further afield. Into the 18th and 19th centuries, there were still attempts to build fine houses, for example Tredegar Square (1830), and the open fields around Mile End New Town were used for the construction of estates of workers' cottages in 1820.[64] 
 Globe Town was established from 1800 to provide for the expanding population of weavers around Bethnal Green, attracted by improving prospects in silk weaving. The population of Bethnal Green trebled between 1801 and 1831, operating 20,000 looms in their own homes. By 1824, with restrictions on importation of French silks relaxed, up to half these looms became idle, and prices were driven down. With many importing warehouses already established in the district, the abundance of cheap labour was turned to boot, furniture and clothing manufacture.[5] Globe Town continued its expansion into the 1860s, long after the decline of the silk industry. 
 During the 19th century, building on an adhoc basis could never keep up with the needs of the expanding population. Henry Mayhew visited Bethnal Green in 1850 and wrote for the Morning Chronicle, as a part of a series forming the basis for London Labour and the London Poor (1851), that the trades in the area included tailors, costermongers, shoemakers, dustmen, sawyers, carpenters, cabinet makers and silkweavers. He noted that in the area: 
 
roads were unmade, often mere alleys, houses small and without foundations, subdivided and often around unpaved courts. An almost total lack of drainage and sewerage was made worse by the ponds formed by the excavation of brickearth. Pigs and cows in back yards, noxious trades like boiling tripe, melting tallow, or preparing cat's meat, and slaughter houses, dustheaps, and 'lakes of putrefying night soil' added to the filth
—Henry Mayhew London Labour and London Poor (1851), [65]
 
 A movement began to clear the slums – with Burdett-Coutts building Columbia Market in 1869 and with the passing of the "Artisans' and Labourers' Dwelling Act" in 1876 to provide powers to seize slums from landlords and provide access to public funds to build new housing.[66]Housing associations such as the Peabody Trust were formed to provide philanthropic homes for the poor and clearing the slums generally. Expansion work by the railway companies, such as the London and Blackwall Railway and Great Eastern Railway caused large areas of slum housing to be demolished. The "Working Classes Dwellings Act" in 1890 placed a new responsibility to house the displaced residents and this led to the building of new "philanthropic housing" such as Blackwall Buildings and Great Eastern Buildings.[67] 
 By 1890 official slum clearance programmes had begun. One was the creation of the world's first council housing, the LCC Boundary Estate, which replaced the neglected and crowded streets of Friars Mount, better known as The Old Nichol Street Rookery.[68] Between 1918 and 1939 the LCC continued replacing East End housing with five or six storey flats, despite residents preferring houses with gardens and opposition from shopkeepers who were forced to relocate to new, more expensive premises. The Second World War brought an end to further slum clearance.[69] 
 [edit] Second World War 
 
Hardest of all, the Luftwaffe will smash Stepney. I know the East End! Those dirty Jews and Cockneys will run like rabbits into their holes.
 
 Initially, the German commanders were reluctant to bomb London, fearing retaliation against Berlin. On 24 August 1940, a single aircraft, tasked to bomb Tilbury, accidentally bombed Stepney, Bethnal Green and the City. The following night the RAF retaliated by mounting a forty aircraft raid on Berlin, with a second attack three days later. The Luftwaffe changed its strategy from attacking shipping and airfields to attacking cities. The City and West End were designated 'Target Area B'; the East End and docks were 'Target Area A'. The first raid occurred at 4:30 p.m. on 7 September and consisted of 150 Dornier and Heinkel bombers and large numbers of fighters. This was followed by a second wave of 170 bombers. Silvertown and Canning Town bore the brunt of this first attack.[3] 
 Between 7 September 1940 and 10 May 1941, a sustained bombing campaign was mounted. It began with the bombing of London for 57 successive nights,[71] an era known as 'the Blitz'. East London was targeted because the area was a centre for imports and storage of raw materials for the war effort, and the German military command felt that support for the war could be damaged among the mainly working class inhabitants. On the first night of the blitz, 430 civilians were killed and 1600 seriously wounded.[71] The populace responded by evacuating children and the vulnerable to the country[72] and digging in, constructing Anderson shelters in their gardens and Morrison shelters in their houses, or going to communal shelters built in local public spaces.[73] On 10 September 1940, 73 civilians, including women and children preparing for evacuation, were killed when a bomb hit the South Hallsville School. Although the official death toll is 73,[74] many local people believed it must have been higher. Some estimates say 400 or even 600 may have lost their lives during this raid on Canning Town.[75] 
 The effect of the intensive bombing worried the authorities and 'Mass-Observation' was deployed to gauge attitudes and provide policy suggestions,[76] as before the war they had investigated local attitudes to anti-Semitism.[77] The organisation noted that close family and friendship links within the East End were providing the population with a surprising resilience under fire. Propaganda was issued, reinforcing the image of the 'brave chirpy Cockney'. On the Sunday after the Blitz began, Winston Churchill himself toured the bombed areas of Stepney and Poplar. Anti-aircraft installations were built in public parks, such as Victoria Park and the Mudchute on the Isle of Dogs, and along the line of the Thames, as this was used by the aircraft to guide them to their target. 
 The authorities were initially wary of opening the London Underground for shelter, fearing the effect on morale elsewhere in London and hampering normal operations. On 12 September, having suffered five days of heavy bombing, the people of the East End took the matter into their own hands and invaded tube stations with pillows and blankets. The government relented and opened the partially completed Central line as a shelter. Many deep tube stations remained in use as shelters until the end of the war.[3] Aerial mines were deployed on 19 September 1940. These exploded at roof top height, causing severe damage to buildings over a wider radius than the impact bombs. By now, the Port of London had sustained heavy damage with a third of its warehouses destroyed, and the West India and St Katherine Docks had been badly hit and put out of action. Bizarre events occurred when the River Lea burned with an eerie blue flame, caused by a hit on a gin factory at Three Mills, and the Thames itself burnt fiercely when Tate &amp; Lyle's Silvertown sugar refinery was hit.[3] 
 On 3 March 1943 at 8:27 p.m., the unopened Bethnal Green tube station was the site of a wartime disaster. Families had crowded into the underground station due to an air raid siren at 8:17, one of 10 that day. There was a panic at 8:27 coinciding with the sound of an anti-aircraft battery (possibly the recently installed Z battery) being fired at nearby Victoria Park. In the wet, dark conditions, a woman slipped on the entrance stairs and 173 people died in the resulting crush. The truth was suppressed, and a report appeared that there had been a direct hit by a German bomb. The results of the official investigation were not released until 1946.[78] There is now a plaque at the entrance to the tube station, which commemorates the event as the "worst civilian disaster of World War II". The first V-1 flying bomb struck in Grove Road, Mile End, on 13 June 1944, killing six, injuring 30, and making 200 people homeless.[64] The area remained derelict for many years until it was cleared to extend Mile End Park. Before demolition, local artist Rachel Whiteread made a cast of the inside of 193 Grove Road. Despite attracting controversy, the exhibit won her the Turner Prize for 1993.[79] 
 By the end of the war, it is estimated that 80 tons of bombs fell on the Metropolitan Borough of Bethnal Green alone, affecting 21,700 houses, destroying 2,233 and making a further 893 uninhabitable. In Bethnal Green, 555 people were killed, and 400 were seriously injured.[69] For the whole of Tower Hamlets, a total of 2,221 civilians were killed, and 7,472 were injured, with 46,482 houses destroyed and 47,574 damaged.[80] So badly battered was the East End that when Buckingham Palace was hit during the height of the bombing, Queen Elizabeth observed that "It makes me feel I can look the East End in the face."[81][82] By the end of the war, the East End was a scene of devastation, with large areas derelict and depopulated. War production was changed quickly to making prefabricated housing,[83] and many were installed in the bombed areas and remained common into the 1970s. Today, 1950s and 1960s architecture dominates the housing estates of the area such as the Lansbury Estate in Poplar, much of which was built as a show-piece of the 1951 Festival of Britain.[84] 
 [edit] Population 
 Throughout history the area has absorbed waves of immigrants who have each added a new dimension to the culture and history of the area, most notably the French Protestant Huguenots in the 17th century,[7] the Irish in the 18th century,[8]Ashkenazi Jews fleeing pogroms in Eastern Europe towards the end of the 19th century,[9] and the Bangladeshi[10] community settling in the East End from the 1960s. 
 Immigration
  Immigrant communities first developed in the riverside settlements. From the Tudor era until the 20th century, ships crew were employed on a casual basis. New and replacement crew would be found wherever they were available, local sailors being particularly prized for their knowledge of currents and hazards in foreign ports. Crews would be paid off at the end of their voyage. Inevitably, permanent communities became established, including colonies of Lascars and Africans from the Guinea Coast. Large Chinatowns at both Shadwell and Limehouse developed, associated with the crews of merchantmen in the opium and tea trades. It was only after the devastation of the Second World War that this predominantly Han Chinese community relocated to Soho.[85] 
 In 1786, the Committee for the Relief of the Black Poor was formed by citizens concerned at the size of London's indigent Black population, many of whom had been expelled from North America as Black Loyalists — former slaves who had fought on the side of the British in the War of Independence. Others were discharged sailors and some a legacy of British involvement in the slave trade. The committee distributed food, clothing, medical aid and found work for men, from various locations including the White Raven tavern in Mile End.[86] They also helped the men to go abroad, some to Canada. In October 1786, the Committee funded an ill-fated expedition of 280 Black men, 40 Black women and 70 White women (mainly wives and girlfriends) to settle in Sierra Leone.[87] From the late 19th century, a large African mariner community was established in Canning Town as a result of new shipping links to the Caribbean and West Africa.[88] 
 Immigrants have not always been readily accepted and in 1517 the Evil May Day riots, where foreign-owned property was attacked, resulted in the deaths of 135 Flemings in Stepney. The Gordon Riots of 1780 began with burnings of the houses of Catholics and their chapels in Poplar and Spitalfields.[89] 
 In the 1870 and 80s, so many Jewish émigrés were arriving that over 150 synagogues were built. Today there are only four active synagogues remaining in Tower Hamlets, the Congregation of Jacob Synagogue (1903 – Kehillas Ya’akov), the East London Central Synagogue (1922), the Fieldgate Street Great Synagogue (1899) and Sandys Row Synagogue (1766).[90] Jewish immigration to the East End peaked in the 1890s, leading to anti-foreigner agitation by the British Brothers League, formed in 1902 by Captain William Stanley Shaw and the Conservative MP for Stepney, Major Evans-Gordon, who had overturned a Liberal majority in the 1900 General Election on a platform of limiting immigration. In Parliament in 1902 Evans-Gordon claimed that "not a day passes but English families are ruthlessly turned out to make room for foreign invaders. The rates are burdened with the education of thousands of foreign children".[91] Jewish immigration only slowed with the passing of the Aliens Act 1905 that gave the Home Secretary powers to regulate and control immigration.[92] 
 Community tensions were again raised by an anti-semitic Fascist march that took place in 1936 and was blocked by residents and activists at the Battle of Cable Street.[93] From the mid-1970s anti-Asian violence occurred[94] culminating in the murder on 4 May 1978 of a 25–year old clothing worker named Altab Ali by three white teenagers in a racially motivated attack. Bangladeshi groups mobilised for self-defence, 7,000 people marched to Hyde Park in protest, and the community became more politically involved.[95] The former churchyard of St Mary's Whitechapel, near where the attack occurred, was renamed "Altab Ali Park" in 1998 as a commemoration of his death. Inter-racial tension has continued with occasional outbreaks of violence and in 1993 there was a council seat win for the British National Party (since lost).[96] A 1999 bombing in Brick Lane was part of a series that targeted ethnic minorities, gays and "multiculturalists".[97] 
 Demographics
  The population of the East End increased inexorably throughout the 19th century. House building could not keep pace and overcrowding was rife. It was not until the interwar period that there was a decline caused by migration to new Essex suburbs like the Becontree estate, built by the London County Council between 1921 and 1932, and to areas outside London.[98] This depopulation accelerated after the Second World War and has only recently begun to reverse. 
 These population figures reflect the area that now forms the London Borough of Tower Hamlets only: 
Borough
1811[99]
1841[99]
1871[99]
1901[100]
1931[100]
1961[100]
1971[101]
1991
2001[102]
Bethnal Green
33,619
74,088
120,104
129,680
108,194
47,078
n/a
n/a
n/a
Poplar
13,548
31,122
116,376
168,882
155,089
66,604
Stepney
131,606
203,802
275,467
298,600
225,238
92,000
Total
178,773
309,012
511,947
597,102
488,611
205,682
165,791
161,064
196,106
 By comparison, in 1801 the population of England and Wales was 9 million; by 1851 it had more than doubled to 18  million, and by the end of the century had reached 40 million.[64] Today Bangladeshis form the largest minority population in Tower Hamlets, constituting 33.5% of the borough population at the 2001 census, and is the largest Bangladeshi community in Britain.[103] The 2006 estimates show a decline in this group to 29.8% of the population, reflecting a movement to better economic circumstances and the larger houses available in the eastern suburbs.[104] In this, the latest group of migrants are following a pattern established for over three centuries. 
 The high levels of poverty in the East End have, throughout history, corresponded with a high incidence of crime. From earliest times, crime depended, as did labour, on the importing of goods to London, and their interception in transit. Theft occurred in the river, on the quayside and in transit to the City warehouses. This was why, in the 17th century, the East India Company built high-walled, guarded docks at Blackwall to minimise the vulnerability of their cargoes. Armed convoys would then take the goods to the company's secure compound in the City. The practice led to the creation of ever larger docks throughout the area, and for large roads to be driven through the crowded 19th century slums to carry goods from the docks.[3] 
 No police force operated in London before the 1750s. Crime and disorder were dealt with by a system of magistrates and volunteer parish constables, with strictly limited jurisdiction. Salaried constables were introduced by 1792, although they were few in number and their power and jurisdiction continued to derive from local magistrates, who in extremis could be backed by militias. In 1798, England's first Marine Police Force was formed by magistrate Patrick Colquhoun and a Master Mariner, John Harriott to tackle theft and looting from ships anchored in the Pool of London and the lower reaches of the river. Its base was (and remains) in Wapping High Street. It is now known as the Marine Support Unit.[105] 
 In 1829, the Metropolitan Police Force were formed, with a remit to patrol within 7 miles (11 km) of Charing Cross, with a force of 1,000 men in 17 divisions, including 'H' division, based in Stepney. Each division was controlled by a superintendent, under whom were four inspectors and sixteen sergeants. The regulations demanded that recruits should be under thirty-five years of age, well built, at least 5-foot-7-inch (1.70 m) in height, literate and of good character.[106] 
 Unlike the former constables, the police were recruited widely and financed by a levy on ratepayers; so they were initially disliked. The force took until the mid-19th century to be established in the East End. Unusually, Joseph Sadler Thomas, a Metropolitan Police superintendent of 'F' (Covent Garden) Division appears to have mounted the first local investigation (in Bethnal Green), in November 1830 of the London Burkers.[107] In 1841, a specific Dockyard division of the Metropolitan force was formed to assume responsibility for shore patrols within the docks,[108] a detective department was formed in 1842, and in 1865, 'J' division was established in Bethnal Green.[106] 
 One of the East End industries that serviced ships moored off the Pool of London was prostitution, and in the 17th century, this was centred on the Ratcliffe Highway, a long street lying on the high ground above the riverside settlements. In 1600, it was described by the antiquarian John Stow as 'a continual street, or filthy straight passage, with alleys of small tenements or cottages builded, inhabited by sailors and victuallers.' Crews were 'paid off' at the end of a long voyage, and would spend their earnings on drink in the local taverns.[109] 
 One madame described as 'the great bawd of the seamen' by Samuel Pepys was Damaris Page. Born in Stepney in approximately 1610, she had moved from prostitution to running brothels, including one on the Highway that catered for ordinary seaman and a further establishment nearby that catered for the more expensive tastes amongst the officers and gentry. She died wealthy, in 1669, in a house on the Highway, despite charges being brought against her and time spent in Newgate Prison.[109][110] 
 By the 19th century, an attitude of toleration had changed, and the social reformer William Acton described the riverside prostitutes as a 'horde of human tigresses who swarm the pestilent dens by the riverside at Ratcliffe and Shadwell'. The 'Society for the Suppression of Vice' estimated that between the Houndsditch, Whitechapel and Ratcliffe area there were 1803 prostitutes; and between Mile End, Shadwell and Blackwall 963 women in the trade. They were often victims of circumstance, there being no welfare state and a high mortality rate amongst the inhabitants that left wives and daughters destitute, with no other means of income.[111] 
 At the same time, religious reformers began to introduce 'Seamans' Missions' throughout the dock areas that both sought to provide for seafarer's physical needs and to keep them away from the temptations of drink and women. Eventually, the passage of the 'Contagious Diseases Act' in 1864 allowed policemen to arrest prostitutes and detain them in hospital. The act was repealed in 1886, after agitation by early feminists, such as Josephine Butler and Elizabeth Wolstenholme led to the formation of the Ladies National Association for the Repeal of the Contagious Diseases Acts.[112] 
 Notable crimes in the area include the Ratcliff Highway murders (1813);[113] the killings committed by the London Burkers (apparently inspired by Burke and Hare) in Bethnal Green (1831);[114] the notorious serial killings of prostitutes by Jack the Ripper[32] (1888); and the Siege of Sidney Street (1911) (in which anarchists, inspired by the legendary Peter the Painter, took on Home Secretary Winston Churchill, and the army).[115] 
 In the 1960s the East End was the area most associated with gangster activity, most notably that of the Kray twins.[116] The 1996 Docklands bombing caused significant damage around South Quay Station, to the south of the main Canary Wharf development. Two people were killed and thirty-nine injured in one of Mainland Britain's biggest bomb attacks by the Provisional Irish Republican Army.[117] This led to the introduction of Police checkpoints controlling access to the Isle of Dogs, reminiscent of the City's 'ring of steel'. 
 [edit] Disasters 
 Many disasters have befallen the residents of the East End, both in war and in peace. In particular, as a maritime port, plague and pestilence have disproportionately fallen on the residents of the East End. The area most afflicted by the Great Plague (1665) was in Spitalfields,[118] and cholera epidemics broke out in Limehouse in 1832 and struck again in 1848 and 1854.[89]Typhus and tuberculosis were also common in the crowded 19th century tenements. The Princess Alice was a passenger steamer crowded with day trippers returning from Gravesend to Woolwich and London Bridge. On the evening of 3 September 1878, she collided with the steam collier Bywell Castle (named for Bywell Castle) and sank into the Thames in under four minutes. Of the approximately 700 passengers, over 600 were lost.[119] 
 During the First World War, the morning of 13 June 1917 was the first ever daylight air-raid over the east end which in total killed 104 people. Sixteen of the dead were 5 and 6 year olds who were sitting in their class room at Upper North Street School, Poplar when the bomb hit. The memorial which still stands today in Poplar Recreation Ground was built by A.R. Adams, a local funeral director at the time. Also, on 19 January 1917, 73 people died, including 14 workers, and more than 400 were injured, in a TNT explosion in the Brunner-Mond munitions factory in Silvertown. Much of the area was flattened, and the shock wave was felt throughout the city and much of Essex. This was the largest explosion in London history, and was heard in Southampton and Norwich. Andreas Angel, chief chemist at the plant, was posthumously awarded the Edward Medal for trying to extinguish the fire that caused the blast.[120] The same year, on 13 June, a bomb from a German Gotha bomber killed 18 children in their primary school in Upper North Street, Poplar. This event is commemorated by the local war memorial erected in Poplar Recreation Ground,[121][122] but during the war a total of 120 children and 104 adults were killed in the East End by aerial bombing, with many more injured.[123] 
 Another tragedy occurred on the morning of 16 May 1968 when Ronan Point, a 23-storey tower block in Newham, suffered a structural collapse due to a natural gas explosion. Four people were killed in the disaster and seventeen were injured, as an entire corner of the building slid away. The collapse caused major changes in UK building regulations and led to the decline of further building of high rise council flats that had characterised 1960s public architecture.[124] 
 [edit] Entertainment 
 Inn-yard theatres were first established in the Tudor period, with the Boar's Head Inn (1557) in Whitechapel, the George in Stepney and a purpose built, but short lived, John Brayne's Red Lion Theatre (1567), nearby.[125] The first permanent theatres with resident companies were constructed in Shoreditch, with James Burbage's The Theatre (1576) and Henry Lanman's Curtain Theatre (1577) standing close together. On the night of 28 December 1598 Burbage's sons dismantled The Theatre, and moved it piece by piece across the Thames to construct the Globe Theatre.[126] 
 The Goodman's Fields Theatre was established in 1727, and it was here that David Garrick made his successful début as Richard III, in 1741. In the 19th century the theatres of the East End rivalled in their grandiosity and seating capacity those of the West End. The first of this era was the ill-fated Brunswick Theatre (1828), which collapsed three days after opening, killing 15 people. This was followed by the opening of the Pavilion (1828) in Whitechapel, the Garrick (1831) in Leman Street, the Effingham (1834) in Whitechapel, the Standard (1835) in Shoreditch, the City of London (1837) in Norton Folgate, then the Grecian and the Britannia Theatre in Hoxton (1840).[127] Though very popular for a time, from the 1860s onwards these theatres, one by one, began to close, the buildings were demolished and their very memory began to fade.[128] 
 There were also many Yiddish theatres, particularly around Whitechapel. These developed into professional companies, after the arrival of Jacob Adler in 1884 and the formation of his 'Russian Jewish Operatic Company' that first performed in Beaumont Hall,[129] Stepney, and then found homes both in the Prescott Street Club, Stepney, and in Princelet Street in Spitalfields.[130] The Pavilion became an exclusively Yiddish theatre in 1906, finally closing in 1936 and being demolished in 1960. Other important Jewish theatres were Feinmans, The Jewish National Theatre and the Grand Palais. Performances were in Yiddish, and predominantly melodrama.[90] These declined, as audience and actors left for New York and the more prosperous parts of London.[131] 
 The once popular music halls of the East End have mostly met the same fate as the theatres. Prominent examples included the London Music Hall (1856–1935), 95-99 Shoreditch High Street, and the Royal Cambridge Music Hall (1864–1936), 136 Commercial Street. An example of a 'giant pub hall', Wilton's Music Hall (1858), remains in Grace's Alley, off Cable Street and the early 'saloon style' Hoxton Hall (1863) survives in Hoxton Street, Hoxton.[132] Many popular music hall stars came from the East End, including Marie Lloyd. 
 The music hall tradition of live entertainment lingers on in East End public houses, with music and singing. This is complemented by less respectable amusements such as striptease, which, since the 1950s has become a fixture of certain East End pubs, particularly in the area of Shoreditch, despite being a target of local authority restraints.[133] 
 Novelist and social commentator Walter Besant proposed a 'Palace of Delight'[134] with concert halls, reading rooms, picture galleries, an art school and various classes, social rooms and frequent fêtes and dances. This coincided with a project by the philanthropist businessman, Edmund Hay Currie to use the money from the winding up of the 'Beaumont Trust',[135] together with subscriptions to build a 'People's Palace' in the East End. Five acres of land were secured on the Mile End Road, and the Queen's Hall was opened by Queen Victoria on 14 May 1887. The complex was completed with a library, swimming pool, gymnasium and winter garden, by 1892, providing an eclectic mix of populist entertainment and education. A peak of 8000 'tickets' were sold for classes in 1892, and by 1900, a Bachelor of Science degree awarded by the University of London was introduced.[136] In 1931, the building was destroyed by fire, but the Draper's Company, major donors to the original scheme, invested more to rebuild the technical college and create Queen Mary's College in December 1934.[137] A new 'People's Palace' was constructed, in 1937, by the Metropolitan Borough of Stepney, in St Helen's Terrace. This finally closed in 1954.[138] 
 Professional theatre returned briefly to the East End in 1972, with the formation of the Half Moon Theatre in a rented former synagogue in Aldgate. In 1979, they moved to a former Methodist chapel, near Stepney Green and built a new theatre on the site, opening in May 1985, with a production of Sweeney Todd. The theatre enjoyed success, with premières by Dario Fo, Edward Bond and Steven Berkoff, but by the mid-1980s, the theatre suffered a financial crisis and closed. After years of disuse, it has been converted to a public house.[139] The theatre spawned two further arts projects: the Half Moon Photography Workshop, exhibiting in the theatre and locally, and from 1976 publishing Camerwork,[140] and the 'Half Moon Young People's Theatre', which remains active in Tower Hamlets.[141] 
 The football team followed by East End people is West Ham United, founded in 1895 as Thames Ironworks. The 'other' East London club is Leyton Orient, and to a lesser extent Dagenham and Redbridge, but rather than rivalry, there is some overlap of support. 
 Historically, the East End has suffered from under-investment in both housing stock and infrastructure. From the 1950s, the East End represented the structural and social changes affecting the UK economy in a microcosm. The area had one of the highest concentrations of council housing, the legacy both of slum clearance and war time destruction.[142] The progressive closure of docks, cutbacks in railways and the closure and relocation of industry contributed to a long term decline, removing many of the traditional sources of low- and semi-skilled jobs. However, beginning with the LDDC, in the 1980s, there have been a number of urban regeneration projects, most notably Canary Wharf, a huge commercial and housing development on the Isle of Dogs. Many of the 1960s tower blocks have been demolished or renovated, replaced by low rise housing, often in private ownership, or owned by housing associations.[143] 
 The area around Old Spitalfields Market and Brick Lane called "London's curry capital"[144] has been extensively regenerated and, amongst other things, has been dubbed as Bangla Town.[145] The contribution of Bangladeshi people to British life was recognised in 1998, when Pola Uddin, Baroness Uddin of Bethnal Green became the first Bangladeshi-born Briton to enter the House of Lords; and the first Muslim peer to swear her oath of allegiance in the name of her own faith.[146] 
 The area is also home to a number of commercial and public art galleries; including the newly expanded Whitechapel Gallery. The artists Gilbert and George have long made their home and workshop in Spitalfields,[147] and the neighbourhood around Hoxton Square has become a centre for modern British art, including the White Cube gallery, with many artists from the Young British Artists movement living and working in the area. This has made the area around Hoxton and Shoreditch fashionable, with many former residents now driven out by higher property prices, and a busy nightlife has developed, with over 80 licensed premises around Shoreditch.[148] 
 By the mid-1980s, both the District line (extended to the East End in 1884 and 1902)[149] and Central line (1946)[150] were running beyond their capacity, and the Docklands Light Railway (1987) and Jubilee line (1999) were constructed to improve rail communications through the riverside district. There was a long standing plan to provide London with an inner motorway box, the East Cross Route. Apart from a short section, this was never built,[151] but road communications were improved by the completion of the Limehouse Link tunnel under Limehouse Basin in 1993 and the extension of the A12 connecting to the Blackwall Tunnel with an upgraded carriageway in the 1990s. The extension of the East London line to the north, on the border between Islington and Hackney, provided further travel links in 2010. From 2017, Crossrail line 1 is expected to create a fast railway service across London, from east to west, with a major interchange at Whitechapel. New river crossings are planned at Beckton, (the Thames Gateway Bridge)[152] and the proposed Silvertown Link road tunnel, to supplement the existing Blackwall Tunnel.[153] 
 The 2012 Summer Olympics and Paralympics were held in an Olympic Park created on former industrial land around the River Lea. It is intended that this should leave a legacy of new sports facilities, housing, and industrial and technical infrastructure that will further help regenerate the area.[11] This is linked to a new Stratford International station in the Newham, and the future Stratford City development.[154] Also in Newham is London City Airport, built in 1986 in the former King George V Dock, a small airport serving short-haul domestic and European destinations. In the same area, the University of East London has developed a new campus which will provide the United States Olympic Team its training base during the London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games.[155] The Queen Mary campus has expanded into new accommodation both adjacent to its existing site at Mile End, and with specialist medical campuses at the Royal London Hospital, Whitechapel and at Charterhouse Square in the City. Whitechapel is the base for the London Air Ambulance, and the hospital's clinical facilities are undergoing a £1 billion refurbishment and expansion.[156] 
 Much of the area remains, however, one of the poorest in Britain and contains some of the capital's worst deprivation[citation needed]. This is in spite of rising property prices and the extensive building of luxury apartments centred largely around the former dock areas and alongside the Thames. With rising costs elsewhere in the capital and the availability of brownfield land, the East End has become a desirable place for business.[12] 
 [edit] Popular culture 
 The East End has been the subject of parliamentary commissions and other examinations of social conditions since the 19th century, as seen in Henry Mayhew's London Labour and the London Poor (1851)[157] and Charles Booth's Life and Labour of the People in London (third, expanded edition 1902-3, in 17 volumes).[44] Narrative accounts of experiences amongst the East End poor were also written by Jack London in The People of the Abyss (1903), by George Orwell in parts of his novel Down and Out in Paris and London, recounting his own experiences in the 1930s, as well as the Jewish writer Emanuel Litvinoff in his autobiographical novel Journey Through a Small Planet set in the 1930s. A further detailed study of Bethnal Green was carried out in the 1950s by sociologists Michael Young and Peter Willmott, in Family and Kinship in East London.[158] 
 Themes from these social investigations have been drawn out in fiction. Crime, poverty, vice, sexual transgression, drugs, class-conflict and multi-cultural encounters and fantasies involving Jewish, Chinese and Indian immigrants are major themes. Though the area has been productive of local writing talent, from the time of Oscar Wilde's The Picture of Dorian Gray (1891) the idea of 'slumming it' in the 'forbidden' East End has held a fascination for a coterie of the literati.[159] 
 The image of the East Ender changed dramatically between the 19th century and the 20th. From the 1870s they were characterised in culture as often shiftless, untrustworthy and responsible for their own poverty.[158] However, many East Enders worked in lowly but respectable occupations such as carters, porters and costermongers. This latter group particularly became the subject of music hall songs at the turn of the 20th century, with performers such as Marie Lloyd, Gus Elen and Albert Chevalier establishing the image of the humorous East End Cockney and highlighting the conditions of ordinary workers.[160] This image, buoyed by close family and social links and the community's fortitude in the war, came to be represented in literature and film. However, with the rise of the Kray twins in the 1960s the dark side of East End character returned with a new emphasis on criminality and gangsterism. 
 The success of Jennifer Worth's memoir Call the Midwife (2002, reissued 2007), which became a major best-seller and was adapted by the BBC into their most popular new programme since the current ratings system began,[161] has led to a high level of interest in true-life stories from the East End. Melanie McGrath's Silvertown (2003), about her grandmother’s life in the East End, was also a best-seller, as was the follow-up Hopping, about the annual East Enders’ ‘holiday’ hop-picking in Kent.[162] A raft of similar books were published in the 2000s, among them Gilda O’Neill’s best-selling Our Street (2004),[163] Piers Dudgeon’s Our East End (2009), Jackie Hyam’s Bombsites and Lollipops (2011) and Grace Foakes’ Four Meals for Fourpence (reprinted 2011). In 2012, HarperCollins published The Sugar Girls, a book which tells the true stories of women working at Tate &amp; Lyle's factories in Silvertown since 1944. The authors commented that many of the East Enders they interviewed were unhappy with the way their neighbourhoods had previously been portrayed in books and on screen - as squalid and criminal, in the Dickensian vein[164] - and as a result they were keen to emphasise the positive aspects of East End life and community.[165] 2012 also saw the publication of Spitalfields Life, a book adapted from the very successful blog of the same name, in which ‘the gentle author’ (who is anonymous) writes about, and celebrates, the lives of the men and women who live and work in the East End community of Spitalfields.[166] 
 [edit] See also 
 [edit] Museums of local history 
 [edit] References 
 
 ^ a b The New Oxford Dictionary of English (1998) ISBN 0-19-861263-X - p.582 "East End the part of London east of the City as far as the River Lea, including the Docklands".
^ Tames 2004.
^ a b c d e f g h i j The East End Alan Palmer, (John Murray, London 1989) ISBN 0-7195-5666-X
^ Oxford Dictionary of London Place Names A Mills (2000)
^ a b From 1801 to 1821, the population of Bethnal Green more than doubled and by 1831 had trebled (see table in population section). These newcomers were principally weavers. For further details, see Andrew August Poor Women's Lives: Gender, Work, and Poverty in Late-Victorian London pp 35-6 (Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 1999) ISBN 0-8386-3807-4
^ By the early 19th century, over 11,000 people were crammed into insanitary slums in an area, which took its name from the former Hospital of St Catherine that had stood on the site since the 12th century.
^ a b Bethnal Green: Settlement and Building to 1836, A History of the County of Middlesex: Volume 11: Stepney, Bethnal Green (1998), pp. 91–5. Date accessed: 17 April 2007
^ a b Irish in Britain John A. Jackson, p. 137–9, 150 (Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, 1964)
^ a b The Jews, A History of the County of Middlesex: Volume 1: Physique, Archaeology, Domesday, Ecclesiastical Organization, The Jews, Religious Houses, Education of Working Classes to 1870, Private Education from Sixteenth Century (1969), pp. 149–51. Date accessed: 17 April 2007
^ a b The Spatial Form of Bangladeshi Community in London's East End Iza Aftab (UCL) (particularly background of Bangladeshi immigration to the East End). Date accessed: 17 April 2007
^ a b Olympic Park: Legacy[dead link] (London 2012) accessed 20 September 2007
^ a b Chris Hammett Unequal City: London in the Global Arena (2003) Routledge ISBN 0-415-31730-4
^ The Nineteenth Century XXIV (1888) p.292; in East End 1888 William Fishman (1998) p.1
^ 'Londoners Over the Border', in Household Words Charles Dickens 390 12 September 1857 (Newham archives) accessed 18 September 2007
^ Fishman (1998) defines the boundaries as being Tower Hamlets and the southern part of Hackney. By contrast, Palmer (2000), writing about a later period, includes the dock areas of Newham.
^ a b West Ham: Introduction, A History of the County of Essex: Volume 6 (1973), pp. 43-50 accessed: 23 February 2008
^ a b Becontree hundred: East Ham, A History of the County of Essex: Volume 6 (1973), pp. 1-8 18 September 2007
^ Jack London, The People of the Abyss (1903).
^ New Universal Unabridged Dictionary
^ Concise Oxford Companion to the English Language Ed. Tom McArthur (Oxford University Press, 2005)
^ Estuary English David Rosewarne Times Educational Supplement, (19 October 1984) accessed 20 November 2007
^ Stepney, Old and New London: Volume 2 (1878), pp. 137-142 accessed: 17 November 2007
^ Houses of Cistercian monks: Abbey of Stratford Langthorne, A History of the County of Essex: Volume 2 (1907), pp. 129-133 accessed: 30 April 2008.
^ Stepney: Manors and Estates, A History of the County of Middlesex: Volume 11: Stepney, Bethnal Green (1998), pp. 19-52 accessed: 20 November 2007
^ The ancient parish of Barking: Introduction, A History of the County of Essex: Volume 5 (1966), pp. 184-190 accessed: 20 November 2007
^ The Spitalfields Riots 1769 London Metropolitan Archives accessed on 10 November 2006
^ Curiosities of London: Exhibiting the Most Rare and Remarkable John Timbs, pp. 33 (London, 1855)
^ 1878 Foundation Deed Of The Salvation Army (Salvation Army history) accessed 15 February 2007
^ History of Barnardo's Homes (Barnardo's 2007) accessed 29 May 2007
^ Toynbee Hall, named for Arnold Toynbee was founded in 1884 in Commercial Street as a centre for social reform by Samuel and Henrietta Barnett with support from Balliol and Wadham College, Oxford; its work continues today.
^ Toynbee Hall (Sparticus Educational) accessed 26 September 2007
^ a b East End 1888 William Fishman (Duckworth 1998) ISBN 0-7156-2174-2
^ East End Jewish Radicals 1875-1914 William J Fishman (Five Leaves Publications, 2004) ISBN 0-907123-45-7
^ The Battleship Potemkin and Stepney Green[dead link] (East London History Society) accessed on 10 November 2006
^ Stalin, Man of the Borderlands Alfred J. Rieber The American Historical Review, 106.5 December 2001 (The History Cooperative)
^ Lenin stayed in Bloomsbury. Stalin, then known as Joseph Djugashvili, was the delegate from Tbilisi. He did not speak at the conference, and did not refer to it in his own memoires. An account of the conference under his name appeared in the Bolshevik newspaper Bakinskii proletarii (but was excised from the second edition of his collected works). He stayed in Tower House, a hostel for itinerant workers near the London Hospital, for two weeks, paying sixpence a night for a cubicle. Jack London and George Orwell, in their respective periods, also stayed at the hostel writing on the poor conditions. Today, the hostel provides luxury housing for City workers. (see Guardian, below)
^ Luxury beckons for East End's house of history Mark Gould and Jo Revill 24 October 2004 The Guardian accessed 25 February 2007
^ Chapter 16: My Second Foreign Exite: German Socialism Trotsky, Leon My Life (Charles Schribner’s Sons, NY, 1930) Marxist Internet Archive. Retrieved 27 February 2008
^ John Burns is commemorated in the name given to a current Woolwich Ferry)
^ 2.5p in modern coinage
^ a b The Great Dock Strike of 1889[dead link] Smith and Nash, The Story of the Dockers' Strike (1889) in London Docklands History for GCSE. Retrieved 18 September 2007
^ Angela Georgina Burdett-Coutts in National Dictionary of Biography accessed 3 February 2007
^ Social Policy: From the Victorians to the Present Day Susan Morris (LSE seminars) accessed 10 November 2006
^ a b Life and Labour of the People in London (London: Macmillan, 1902-1903) at The Charles Booth on-line archive accessed 10 November 2006
^ The Webbs: Beatrice (1858-1943) and Sidney (1859-1947) (The history of the LSE) accessed 15 November 2007
^ Barbara Castle, Sylvia and Christabel Pankhurst (Penguin Books, 1987) ISBN 0-14-008761-3
^ Poplarism, 1919-25: George Lansbury and the Councillors' Revolt Noreen Branson (Lawrence &amp; Wishart, 1980) ISBN 0-85315-434-1
^ Breaking the General Strike[dead link] (East London History Society) accessed 15 November 2007
^ Building the Great Eastern Port Cities: London. Retrieved 17 April 2007
^ West India Docks (1803-1980) Port Cities: London. Retrieved 29 September 2007
^ East India Docks (1806-1967) Port Cities: London. Retrieved 29 September 2007
^ London Docks (1805-1971) Port Cities: London. Retrieved 29 September 2007
^ St Katharine Docks (1828-1969) Port Cities: London. Retrieved 29 September 2007
^ Millwall Docks (1868-1980) Port Cities: London. Retrieved 29 September 2007
^ Our Home Railways (Volume 2) W.J. Gordon (1910, Frederick Warne &amp; Co, London)
^ Basildon's Railway Stations Basildon History On-line. Retrieved 23 October 2007
^ Bow Disused stations, site record, Subterranea Britannica. Retrieved 23 October 2007
^ Royal Victoria Dock (1855-1981) Port Cities: London. Retrieved 29 September 2007
^ Royal Albert Dock (1880-1980) Port Cities: London. Retrieved 29 September 2007
^ King George V Dock (1921-1981) Port Cities: London. Retrieved 29 September 2007
^ Royal Docks - a short History Royal Docks Trust (2006) accessed 18 September 2007
^ The London Docklands Development Corporation 1981–1998 (2007) LDDC accessed 18 September 2007
^ Tilbury Dock (1886-1981) Port Cities:London. Retrieved 29 September 2007
^ a b c What lies beneath ... East End of London East London History Society accessed 5 October 2007
^ 'Bethnal Green: Building and Social Conditions from 1837 to 1875', A History of the County of Middlesex: Volume 11: Stepney, Bethnal Green (1998), pp. 120-26 accessed: 14 November 2006.
^ Hovels to High Rise: State Housing in Europe Since 1850 Anne Power (Routeledge, 1993) ISBN 0-415-08935-2
^ The estate of Sir Charles Wheler and the Wilkes family, Survey of London: volume 27: Spitalfields and Mile End New Town Great Eastern Buildings (1957), pp. 108-115. Retrieved 17 May 2008
^ Walks Through History: Exploring the East End, Taylor, Rosemary (Breedon Books 2001) ISBN 1-85983-270-9
^ a b Bethnal Green: Building and Social Conditions from 1915 to 1945, A History of the County of Middlesex: Volume 11: Stepney, Bethnal Green (1998), pp. 132-135 accessed: 10 October 2007
^ From Here to Obscurity Yoel Sheridan (Tenterbooks, 2001) ISBN 0-9540811-0-2
^ a b The weather closed in on the night of 2 November 1940, otherwise London would have been bombed for 76 successive nights. Docklands at War - The Blitz[dead link] The Museum in Docklands accessed 27 February 2008
^ An earlier planned evacuation had been met with intense distrust in the East End, families preferring to remain united and in their own homes (see Palmer, 1989).
^ The man responsible for the shelter programme was Charles Kay MP, London's Joint Regional Commissioner, and a former councillor and Mayor of Poplar. Elected on a pro-war ticket within the first 30 weeks of war (see Palmer, 1989, p. 139)
^ Andrew Swinney (17 February 2003). "HISTORY TOUR - Disaster! 2". Webapps.newham.gov.uk. http://webapps.newham.gov.uk/History_canningtown/page18a.htm. Retrieved 23 July 2011.
^ Remembering the East End:The Second World War Age-exchange accessed 14 November 2007
^ Mass-Observation Archive: Topic Collections:Air Raids 1938-45 (Box TC23/9/T) University of Sussex, special collections accessed 15 November 2007
^ Mass-Observation Archive: Topic Collections:Anti-Semitism survey 1939-51 University of Sussex, special collections accessed 15 November 2007
^ Bethnal Green tube disaster[dead link] (BBC Homeground) accessed 15 February 2007
^ Best and worst of art bites the dust Roberts, Alison The Times, London, 12 January 1994 accessed 5 October 2007
^ The East End at War Rosemary Taylor and Christopher Lloyd (Sutton Publishing, 2007) ISBN 0-7509-4913-9
^ "Biography of Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother". BritainExpress. http://www.britainexpress.com/royals/queen-mother.htm. Retrieved 13 February 2007.
^ Jennifer Wilding. "The Will to Fight". On War. http://www.onwar.com/articles/0205.htm. Retrieved 13 February 2007.
^ Pre-fabricated housing was constructed under the auspices of the Burt Committee and the Housing (Temporary Accommodation) Act 1944.
^ The Lansbury Estate: Introduction and the Festival of Britain exhibition, Survey of London: volumes 43 and 44: Poplar, Blackwall and Isle of Dogs (1994), pp. 212-23 accessed: 18 September 2007
^ London's First Chinatown Port Cities: London. Retrieved 29 May 2007
^ Further relief was distributed at the Yorkshire Stingo, on the south side of Marylebone Road, with other centres of Black poor being the rookery of Seven Dials and Marylebone.
^ Braidwood, Stephen Black Poor and White Philanthropists: London's Blacks and the Foundation of the Sierra Leone Settlement 1786 - 1791 (Liverpool University Press, 1994)
^ Geoffrey Bell, The other Eastenders : Kamal Chunchie and West Ham's early black community (Stratford: Eastside Community Heritage, 2002)
^ a b London from the Air[dead link] East London History Society accessed 5 July 2007
^ a b Exploring the vanishing Jewish East End[dead link]London Borough of Tower Hamlets accessed 26 September 2007
^ Dispersing the Myths about Asylum Helen Shooter, March 2003 (Socialist Review) accessed 1 October 2007
^ Aliens Act 1905 (5 Edward VII c.13) (UK Government Acts) available online at Moving Here
^ Day the East End said 'No pasaran' to Blackshirts by Audrey Gillan, The Guardian, 30 September 2006. Retrieved 17 April 2007
^ Bethnal Green and Stepney Trades Council Blood on the Streets (report published 1978)
^ Troyna, Barry and Carrington, Bruce Education, Racism and Reform pp. 30–31 (Taylor &amp; Francis, 1990) ISBN 0-415-03826-X
^ On this day report BBC accessed: 17 April 2007
^ Life sentence for London nailbomber, The Job, published by the London Metropolitan Police, 30 June 2000; accessed: 17 April 2007
^ Metropolitan Essex since 1919: Suburban growth, A History of the County of Essex: Volume 5 (1966), pp. 63-74 accessed: 18 October 2007
^ a b c Population data for Civil Parishes Statistical Abstract for London Vol IV (London County Council 1901)
^ a b c A vision of Britain between 1801 and 2001. Including maps, statistical trends and historical descriptions Vision of Britain - Population data: Metropolitan Borough of Bethnal Green, Metropolitan Borough of Poplar, Metropolitan Borough of Stepney
^ Vision of Britain (LB Tower Hamlets Population) accessed 22 February 2008
^ Neighbourhood Statistics - LB Tower Hamlets statistics (National Statistics) accessed 22 February 2008
^ 2001 Census (29 April 2001). "Census 2001 Profiles — Tower Hamlets". National Statistics Online. http://www.statistics.gov.uk/census2001/profiles/00bg.asp. Retrieved 200-03-26.
^ Bangladeshi population estimates - Tower Hamlets Neighbourhood Statistics (Office for National Statistics). (13 July 2006). Retrieved 27 March 2009.
^ History of the Marine Support Unit[dead link] (Metropolitan Police) accessed 24 January 2007
^ a b Records of Service (Metropolitan Police) accessed 23 October 2007
^ Early Murder Investigations The Official Encyclopaedia of Scotland Yard, accessed 23 October 2007
^ History of the Metropolitan Police: Time Line 1829 - 1849 (Metropolitan Police) accessed 23 October 2007
^ a b Prostitution in maritime London Port Cities: London. Retrieved 29 September 2007
^ Faramerz Dabhoiwala, "Damaris page" (c.1610–1669), Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, (2004) online edition (subscription only)
^ 19th century responses to prostitution Port Cities: London. Retrieved 29 September 2007
^ Prostitution in maritime London Port Cities: London. Retrieved 29 September 2007
^ Ratcliffe Highway Murders (Thames Police Museum) accessed 15 February 2007
^ Sarah Wise - The Italian Boy: A Tale of Murder and Body Snatching in 1830s London (Metropolitan Books, 2004) ISBN 0-8050-7537-2
^ The Houndsditch Murders and the Siege of Sidney Street, Donald Rumbelow, ISBN 0-491-03178-5
^ Inside the Firm: The Untold Story of the Krays' Reign of Terror Tony Lambrianou (Pan Books 2002) ISBN 0-330-49014-1
^ Statement in Lord's Northern Ireland debate The Lord Privy Seal (Viscount Cranborne) 12 February 1996 (Lord's Hansard, UK Parliament) accessed 26 September 2007
^ Plague deaths measured at more than 3000 deaths per 478 sq yards in Spitalfields in 1665 (source: London from the Air)
^ Princess Alice Disaster Thames Police Museum accessed 19 September 2007
^ The Silvertown Explosion: London 1917 Graham Hill and Howard Bloch (Stroud: Tempus Publishing 2003). ISBN 0-7524-3053-X.
^ The Poplar War Memorial is an exclusively civilian memorial, reflecting the pacifism of the Mayor Will Crooks and local MP George Lansbury.
^ East London in Mourning (Peace Pledge Union) accessed 2 April 2007
^ The East End at War[dead link] East London History Society accessed 14 November 2007
^ Collapse: Why Buildings Fall Down Phil Wearne (Channel 4 books) ISBN 0-7522-1817-4
^ Red Lion Theatre, Whitechapel Christopher Phillpotts (CrossRail Documentary Report, prepare by MoLAS accessed 17 November 2007
^ William Shakespeare: A Compact Documentary Life Samuel Schoenbaum (Oxford University Press, 1987) ISBN 0-19-505161-0
^ Haycroft, Jack Adams and the troupe moved to Hoxton from premises in Shoreditch, that had operated from the early 1830s, The Making of the Britannia Theatre Alan D. Craxford and Reg Moore, from Sam and Sallie: A novel of the theatre Alfred L. Crauford, (London: Cranley and Day 1933) accessed 22 September 2007
^ Theatre in the Victorian Age Michael Booth (CUP 1991) pp. 4-6
^ Yiddish Theatre and music hall in London: 1880 - 1905 The Jewish Museum (2004) accessed on 31 March 2007
^ A Life on the Stage: A Memoir Jacob Adler translated and with commentary by Lulla Rosenfeld, (Knopf NY 1999) ISBN 0-679-41351-0
^ The end of Yiddish theatre[dead link] East London History Society accessed on 29 April 2007
^ The Last Empires: A Music Hall Companion ed. Benny Green (London, Pavilion Books Ltd. in association with Michael Joseph Ltd., 1986)
^ Lara Clifton Baby Oil and Ice: Striptease in East London (DoNotPress, 2002) ISBN 1-899344-85-3
^ In Walter Besant All Sorts and Conditions of Men (1882)
^ In 1841, John Barber Beaumont died and left property in Beaumont Square, Stepney to provide for the 'education and entertainment' of people from the neighbourhood. The charity - and its property - was becoming moribund by the 1870s, and in 1878 it was wound up by the Charity Commissioners, providing its new chair, Sir Edmund Hay Currie, with £120,000 to invest in a similar project. He raised a further £50,000 and secured continued funding from the Draper's Company for ten years (The Whitechapel Society, below)
^ From Palace to College - An illustrated account of Queen Mary College G. P. Moss and M. V. Saville pp. 39-48 (University of London 1985) ISBN 0-902238-06-X
^ The People's Palace[dead link] The Whitechapel Society (2006). Retrieved 5 July 2007
^ Origins and History Queen Mary, University of London Alumni Booklet (2005) accessed 5 July 2007
^ Royal Holloway Half Moon Theatre archive Archives in M25. Retrieved 23 October 2007
^ British Photography 1945-80: Part 4: Britain in the 70s[dead link]The New York Times online. Retrieved 23 May 2007
^ About Us Half Moon Young People's Theatre accessed 23 October 2007
^ Poverty, Housing Tenure and Social Exclusion Peter Lee and Alan Murie, (The Policy Press in association with the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, 1997) ISBN 1-86134-063-X
^ Housing associations, also known as registered social landlords, active in the East End, include: BGVPHA (Bethnal Green and Victoria Park Housing Association, Tower Hamlets Community Housing, Poplar HARCA and EastendHomes.
^ "Brick Lane Named ‘Curry Capital 2012′". Londonist. 31 March 2011. http://londonist.com/2011/03/brick-lane-named-curry-capital-2012.php. Retrieved 23 July 2011.
^ The taste of Banglatown Paul Barker 13 April 2004 The Guardian accessed 18 September 2007
^ Bangladeshi London (Exploring 20th century London) accessed 26 March 2009
^ Gilbert &amp; George: The Complete Pictures, Rudi Fuchs (Tate Publishing, 2007) ISBN 978-1-85437-681-7
^ Draft Statement of Licensing Policy (s5.2) - London Borough of Hackney (2007)
^ District line facts TfL accessed 23 October 2007
^ An extended history of the Central line TfL accessed 23 October 2007
^ East Cross Route[dead link] (Chris's British Road Directory) accessed 23 October 2007
^ Thames Gateway Bridge Transport Projects in London (alwaystouchout) accessed 20 July 2007
^ Silvertown Link Transport Projects in London (alwaystouchout) accessed 20 July 2007
^ Webster, Ben (21 April 2006). "Ghost train station that cost £210 m" (in en-GB). The Times (London). http://www.timesonline.co.uk/article/0,,2-2144275,00.html. Retrieved 24 July 2007.
^ "University of East London Olympic Partnerships". http://www.uel.ac.uk/2012/office/partners.htm.
^ Ben Bradshaw, written Parliamentary answer, Hansard 3 September 2007 accessed 18 September 2007
^ Henry Mayhew, London Labour and the London Poor (London: Griffin, Bohn, and Company, Stationers' Hall Court) in Volume 1 (1861)[dead link], Volume 2[dead link], Volume 3[dead link], and an additional Volume (1862)[dead link] all accessed 14 November 2007
^ a b Family and Kinship in East London Michael Young and Peter Willmott (1957) ISBN 978-0-14-020595-4
^ William Taylor (2001) This Bright Field: A Travel Book in One Place
^ Vaudeville, Old and New: An Encyclopedia of Variety Performers in America pp 351-2, Frank Cullen, Florence Hackman, Donald P. McNeilly (Routledge 2006) ISBN 0-415-93853-8 accessed 22 October 2007
^ "Call the Midwife series ends on ratings high". BBC News. 20 February 2012. http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-17101303/. Retrieved 9 March 2012.[dead link]
^ / "Hopping by Melanie McGrath". HarperCollins. 16 January 2009. http://www.harpercollins.co.uk/News_and_Events/News/Pages/Hopping-by-Melanie-McGrath.aspx /. Retrieved 9 March 2012.
^ / "East End chronicler Gilda O'Neill dies". The Guardian. 29 September 2010. http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2010/sep/29/east-end-gilda-o-neill /. Retrieved 9 March 2012.
^ "Oral History &amp; Creative Non-Fiction: Telling the Lives of the Sugar Girls". History Workshop Online. 11 March 2012. http://www.historyworkshop.org.uk/oral-history-creative-non-fiction-telling-the-lives-of-the-sugar-girls/. Retrieved 11 March 2012.
^ "Call The Midwife". The Sugar Girls blog. 19 February 2012. http://www.thesugargirls.com/call-the-midwife/. Retrieved 9 March 2012.
^ / "Book Review: Spitalfields Life By The Gentle Author". Londonist. 28 February 2012. http://londonist.com/2012/02/spitalfieldslife.php /. Retrieved 9 March 2012.
  
 [edit] Further reading 
 Black, Gerry (2003). Jewish London: An Illustrated History. Derby: Breedon. ISBN 1-85983-363-2.
Fishman, William J. (1988). East End 1888: a year in a London borough among the labouring poor. London: Duckworth. ISBN 0-7156-2174-2.
Fishman, William J. (1979). The Streets of East London. London: Duckworth. ISBN 0-7156-1416-9. (with photographs by Nicholas Breach)
Gerzina, Gretchen (1995). Black London: life before emancipation. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers UP. ISBN 0-8135-2259-5.
Glendinning, Nigel; Griffiths, Joan; Hardiman, Jim; Lloyd, Christopher; Poland, Victoria (2001). Changing Places: a short history of the Mile End Old Town RA area. London: Mile End Old Town Residents’ Association. ISBN 0-9541171-0-7.
Morris, Derek (2007). Mile End Old Town, 1740-1780: a social history of an early modern London Suburb (2nd ed.). London: East London History Society. ISBN 978-0-9506258-6-7.
Palmer, Alan (1989). The East End. London: John Murray. ISBN 0-7195-5666-X.
Tames, Richard (2004). East End Past. London: Historical Publications. ISBN 978-0-948667-94-7.
 [edit] External links 
 Coordinates: 51°31′N 0°03′W﻿ / ﻿51.517°N 0.05°W﻿ / 51.517; -0.05 
  